Situation-Dependent Causal Influence-Based Cooperative Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning

Xiao Du, Yutong Ye, Pengyu Zhang, Yaning Yang, Mingsong Chen, Ting Wang*

Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University
{52265902007, 52205902007, pengyu.zhang, 52215902011}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {mschen, twang}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

3
2
0
2
c
e
D
5
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
5
9
0
.
2
1
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Learning to collaborate has witnessed significant progress
in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However,
promoting coordination among agents and enhancing explo-
ration capabilities remain challenges. In multi-agent environ-
ments, interactions between agents are limited in specific
situations. Effective collaboration between agents thus re-
quires a nuanced understanding of when and how agents’
actions influence others. To this end, in this paper, we pro-
pose a novel MARL algorithm named Situation-Dependent
Causal Influence-Based Cooperative Multi-agent Reinforce-
ment Learning (SCIC), which incorporates a novel Intrinsic
reward mechanism based on a new cooperation criterion mea-
sured by situation-dependent causal influence among agents.
Our approach aims to detect inter-agent causal influences in
specific situations based on the criterion using causal inter-
vention and conditional mutual information. This effectively
assists agents in exploring states that can positively impact
other agents, thus promoting cooperation between agents.
The resulting update links coordinated exploration and intrin-
sic reward distribution, which enhance overall collaboration
and performance. Experimental results on various MARL
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method com-
pared to state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction

Along with the rapid development of deep reinforcement
learning (RL), MARL has attracted increasing attention in
recent years and witnessed significant in real-world prob-
lems such as traffic light control (Wu et al. 2020), coordina-
tion of autonomous vehicles (Kiran et al. 2022), and robotics
control (Wang et al. 2023), which can be effectively mod-
eled as multi-agent game models. The most original MARL
training method is the complete independent training of each
agent, in which other agents are treated as part of the en-
vironment without any coordinated interaction between the
behaviors of agents. Nonetheless, this training method suf-
fers from the dilemma within a non-stationarity environ-
ment.

The Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) emerges as a widely adopted solution for mitigat-
ing the challenges posed by non-stationary environments,

*Corresponding Author

where centralized training allows agents to access informa-
tion about other agents. However, due to partial observ-
ability, during the execution phase, only local behavior-
observation information can be relied upon. Both policy-
based and value-based approaches have been introduced for
CTDE, such as MADDPG (Lowe et al. 2017), COMA (Fo-
erster et al. 2018), MAAC (Iqbal and Sha 2019), and QMIX
(Rashid et al. 2018). Although global information can be ac-
cessed during the centralized training phase, these methods
make an assumption that decentralized policies remain in-
dependent of each other such that the joint policy can be
expressed as a product of independent policies. Thus, two
pivotal challenges stem from the above issues. Firstly, the
complete independence of agents’ policies disregards the in-
fluence of other agents, thereby restricting the agents from
learning coordinated behavior. Secondly, optimizing decen-
tralized strategies for multiple agents solely based on task-
dependent dense reward signals often proves inefficient, par-
ticularly when these reward signals are stochastic or sparse.
Some studies (Liu et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2019) suggest that
to alleviate the non-stationary issue and achieve collabora-
tion between agents, it is imperative for agents to consider
their impact on the behavior of other agents when making
decisions. Other works (Chen et al. 2021; Mahajan et al.
2019; Kim et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022) propose to quantify
the correlation of agent behaviors through mutual informa-
tion (MI), so as to maximize the correlation of agent behav-
iors to enhance collaboration. MI has been identified as an
effective intrinsic reward in promoting coordination in these
works. Unfortunately, effectively coordinating the simulta-
neous actions of multi-agents in these approaches remains
a challenging and intractable issue. To this end, the primary
objective of this study is to address this challenge from a
causal inference perspective.

In the context of control, if an agent can control other
agents, it signifies that the agent can impact other agents
through its actions. However, there is an underappreciated
aspect hidden in this seemingly obvious observation, which
is that the causal effects of behavior are state-dependent.
Considering the multi-robot navigation scenario, when the
current position of robot a is close to robot b and aligned
with the current direction of movement of robot b, then robot
a evidently exerts a strong influence on robot b, irrespective
of the next action of robot a. Conversely, if robot a is situ-

 
 
 
 
 
 
ated far from robot b and not in the movement direction of
robot b, then robot a has a comparatively weaker influence
on robot b. Generally, there are situations in which agents
have immediate causal influence, while in other situations,
such influence is absent. The key intuition of this study lies
in the recognition that the states that enable an agent to have
the ability to influence other agents of interest are important
from both exploration and collaboration perspectives, and
we name these states of importance as significant states. Due
to the fact that the initial states of an agent are rarely able to
control the agents of interest, leading to inefficient training,
these initial states are typically not regarded as significant
states. Nonetheless, recognizing that the significant states
are conducive to inter-agent collaboration, it becomes imper-
ative for the training process to prioritize and proactively ex-
plore these significant states. This exploration impels agents
to consider the state-dependent causal effects among agents
during the exploration process.

In this work, we exploit situation-dependent nature to
measure the causal influence between agents. We propose
an algorithm designed to achieve coordination among agents
and coordinate agents’ exploration, which gives agents an
intrinsic reward based on state-dependent causal influence.
Specifically, at each time step, all agents measure the causal
influence between their actions in the current state and the
next state of other agents, which is used to quantify the ex-
tent of causality between the agent and other agents at the
current moment. The mean of the causal influence origi-
nating from other agents is then taken as the agent’s in-
trinsic reward. Furthermore, the computation of situation-
dependent causal effects leverages conditional mutual in-
formation, which reliably identifies the significant states.
This intrinsic reward mechanism effectively facilitates the
detection of significant states, thereby enhancing the col-
laboration between agents. It’s worth noting that calculat-
ing mutual information of continuous variables is known
to be challenging. Compared to the variational information
maximizing-based algorithms (Chalk, Marre, and Tkacik
2016; Kolchinsky, Tracey, and Wolpert 2019), MINE (Belg-
hazi et al. 2018), which learns a neural estimate of the mu-
tual information, has shown superior performance (Hjelm
et al. 2019; Velickovic et al. 2019). Hence, we employ MINE
to learn the conditional mutual information between agents
by utilizing a forward dynamics model. To summarize, this
paper makes the following three major contributions:

• We model multi-agent reinforcement learning as a causal
graph model by explicitly modeling the influence of
causal factors in a multi-agent setting.

• We formalize the causal influence between agents as
situation-dependent
instead of action-dependent. Ac-
cordingly, a new Intrinsic Reward method with peer in-
centives is further proposed to promote the cooperation
between agents using state-dependent causal influence,
which is measured based on intervention and conditional
mutual information.

• We conduct comprehensive experiments on various
MARL benchmarks. The experimental results demon-
strate that our approach outperforms other competitive

methods, and the learned intrinsic reward proves to be
conducive to learning better policies that achieve agents’
better cooperation in these complex tasks.

Related Work
As an important training paradigm for solving agent co-
ordination problems, CTDE has been widely adopted in
MARL in recent years, where VDN (Sunehag et al. 2018)
and QMIX based on value function decomposition, and
MADDPG and MAAC based on centralized critic are typi-
cal CTDE-based algorithms. Since our approach is designed
to utilize causal influence as an intrinsic reward to enhance
inter-agent collaboration in MARL, in this section we will
briefly review related work in terms of Intrinsic Reward for
MARL and causality in reinforcement learning.

Intrinsic Reward for MARL
Intrinsic rewards help agents learn useful policies across
a wide variety of tasks and environments, even sometimes
with sparse environmental rewards. At each time step, the
agents receive not only environmental rewards but also in-
trinsic rewards. Intrinsic rewards can help agents improve
their exploration ability and enhance social influence. In
reinforcement learning, all kinds of information have vari-
ous signals as intrinsic rewards, such as empowerment (Mo-
hamed and Rezende 2015), model surprise (Blaes et al.
2019), information gain (Houthooft et al. 2016), and learn-
ing progress (Blaes et al. 2019). In MARL, some exist-
ing approaches utilize the correlation or influence of agents
as intrinsic rewards to facilitate collaboration. EITI (Wang
et al. 2020) leverages MI to capture the influence between an
agent’s current trajectory and the next states of other agents
in the environment, which is used as an intrinsic reward
to encourage agents to explore cooperatively. SI (Jaques
et al. 2019) proposes a method that utilizes social influ-
ence as an intrinsic reward, measured by the MI between
an agent’s current action and the estimated next action of
other agents, to achieve coordination and communication in
MARL. VM3-AC (Kim et al. 2023) is similar to the idea
of coordinating inter-agent behavior in SI-MOA, except that
additional latent variables are introduced to induce nonzero
mutual information between multi-agent actions, and the
policy iteration algorithm is modified based on MI. PMIC
(Li et al. 2022) utilizes the MI between global states and
joint actions as a new standard. Based on this standard, it
maximizes the MI related to behaviors that are conducive
to collaboration and minimizes the MI related to behaviors
that are not conducive to collaboration, breaking the current
suboptimal collaboration and learning higher-level collab-
orative behaviors. Comparatively, our approach tackles the
challenge of collaboration among agents from a causal infer-
ence perspective, which detects situation-dependent causal
relationships among agents as intrinsic rewards to facilitate
the exploration of inter-agent coordination.

Causality in Reinforcement Learning
The combination of reinforcement learning and causality has
achieved some progress. The work (Sch¨olkopf et al. 2021)

utilizes causal modeling to achieve better state abstraction,
enabling the agent to concentrate on key aspects and in-
directly improving sampling efficiency. The work (Seitzer,
Sch¨olkopf, and Martius 2021) proposes integrating mea-
sures of causal influence into reinforcement learning algo-
rithms to address the problems of exploration and learn-
ing in the robot manipulation environment. The work (Lee
et al. 2021) utilizes causal intervention to identify the most
relevant state variables for completing a task, thereby re-
ducing the dimensionality of the state space. The work
(Pitis, Creager, and Garg 2020) utilizes influence detec-
tion to create counterfactual data to enhance the training of
RL agents. (Maes, Meganck, and Manderick 2007) extends
causal Bayesian networks to multi-agent models, which in-
spires us to develop a causal graph model for MARL.

Background

t ∈ U i according to its policy π(˙∣oi

Preliminaries
In this work, we consider the fully cooperative multi-agent
game in the partially observable setting, which can be
modeled as a decentralized partially observable Markov
Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek and Amato
2016). The Dec-POMDP is formally defined as a tuple
⟨I, S, U, O, P, R, γ⟩, where I = {1, 2, ....N } denotes the fi-
nite set of agents, st ∈ S denotes the set of joint states that
cannot be observed by agents at the time step t. At each time
step t, each agent i ∈ I can only observe its local observa-
tion oi
t from observation function O(st, i) and chooses an
action ui
t), forming a joint
action ut ∈ U. After executing ut in environment, each agent
i achieves a shared extrinsic reward rt from the reward func-
tion R(st, ut) with a discount factor γ ∈ [0,1) and the next
state st+1 according to the transition function P(st+1∣st, ut).
The goal of a collaborative team is to find a joint policy
π∗ that can maximize the expected extrinsic discount return
E[∑∞
k=1 γtrt] under the setting of fully-cooperative MARL.
In our approach, we adopt a CTDE paradigm, which has
been a widely considered training paradigm in recent efforts
in MARL (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Lowe
et al. 2017; Iqbal and Sha 2019). During training, each agent
can access to full information including the states, actions,
rewards, and actions of other agents, while decentralized ex-
ecution is conditioned solely on individual observation oi
t.

Causal Graphical Models
A causal graphical model (CGM) (Shanmugam 2001) is
commonly represented as directed cyclic graphs (DAGs)
G = (V, E) and is defined by a distribution P over the set
of random variables X . The graph G consists of nodes V
and edges E ∈ V 2 with (v, v) for any v ∈ V . Each node
vi is associated with a random variable X i and each edge
(vi → vj) represents that X i is a direct cause of X j, i.e., X i
is called a parent of X j. The set of parents of X j is denoted
by PAG
j . The distribution P can be represented as

p(X 1, ..., X v) =

v
∏
i=1

pi(X i∣PAG

j ),

(1)

where PAG
j ⊂ {X 1, ..., X v} / {X j} denotes the set of par-
ents of X j. The CGM models the structure of the causal-
ity. To reveal the causal structure from the data distribution,
we assume that CGM satisfies the Markov condition and
the faithfulness assumption, which makes the independence
consistent between the joint distribution P (X 1, ..., X v) and
the graph G.

Intervention
Intervention sampling is a typical operation in causal discov-
ery. Different from standard sampling, it sets the distribu-
tion of variables that require intervention in the causal graph
model to a uniform distribution or fixed value, and then con-
ducts sampling to obtain intervention data. Intervention data
has more causal information than observational data, which
is beneficial to measure causal relationships between ran-
dom variables. In this work, we need to measure the influ-
ence of the current time step’s action of an agent on the state
of other agents in the next time step, which can be obtained
by intervening in the current behavior distribution.

Our Approach
In this section, we present the design of our SCIC approach,
in which the agents simultaneously learn a policy and an in-
trinsic reward function by maximizing the causal influence
between agents, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our SCIC ap-
proach detects the inter-agent causal influences in particular
situations based on causal intervention and conditional mu-
tual information, facilitating agents to explore states that can
affect other agents, thereby promoting cooperation among
agents.

Causal Influence-based Intrinsic Reward Design
A key component of SCIC is the intrinsic reward mecha-
nism that brings each agent to a state where it can influ-
ence interested agents as much as possible. Intuitively, an
agent is more likely to influence interested agents in certain
states, and making agents reach these states as much as pos-
sible is more likely to enhance the causal influence between
agents. We represent agent j being able to be influenced
by agent i as “agent i being able to take control of agent
j”. Through mutual incentives between agents, agents can
achieve friendly interaction and efficient cooperation with
their peers. Thus, the causal influence of other agents on an
agent can be viewed as a necessity for learning intrinsic re-
ward mechanisms. We detect the causal influences between
agents in particular situations using causal intervention and
conditional mutual information. It is worth noting that the
computation of causal influence is only executed during in-
tensive training, where each agent can know the policies and
actions of other agents.

Multi-agent Causal Graph Model We extend the CGM
to the case of decentralized multi-agents as Multi-agent
Causal Graph Model (MACGM), where agents share an en-
vironment and have access to private and/or public variables
of interest during centralized training. The one-step transi-
tion dynamics of MACGM at time step t is modeled a causal

Figure 1: An overview of SCIC framework.

t → Sj

t →
t+1 is a controllable state

tervention in one mechanism does not affect other mech-
anisms (Parascandolo et al. 2017). We believe that this is
also due to the limited scope of intelligent agent interven-
tion, which limits the breadth and frequency of mechanism
changes. Therefore, in this work, we are interested in infer-
ring the influence of the action of agent i over other agents
in a particular situation, i.e. a local inter-agent causal model.
Next, we provide the following definitions:
Definition 1 (Controllable State Variable) If the edge Ai
Sj
t+1 in the graph is “active”, Sj
variable of Ai
t.
Definition 2 (Uncontrollable State Variable) If the edge
t+1 in the graph is “inactive”, Sj
Ai
t+1 is a uncontrol-
lable state variable of Ai
t.
Given these definitions, in this work, our aim is to detect
whether the state is a “Controllable State Variable” for other
agents in a particular situation, i.e. whether the presence of
red arrows in Figure 2 is “active”.
The Cause of an Influence When is action A = a the
cause of outcome S = s? Inspired by the “but-for” test, i.e.
“Without A = a, S = s would not have happened.”, we can
derive that A = a is a necessary condition for S = s to hap-
pen, and when A changes, S also gets a different value. This
fits with the algorithmic view of causality: if the value of
S is determined by the value of A, then A is the cause of
S. The “but-for” test yields potentially counter-intuitive as-
sessments. Considering the influence between two agents lo-
cated close to each other, the behavior of agent a is regarded
as the cause of the influence on another agent b, because dif-
ferent behaviors of agent a will lead to different behavior
choices of agent b, thus affecting the next state of b. Algo-
rithmically, the behavior of the agent a needs to be known in
order to determine the effect on agent b - all possible behav-
iors of agent a are considered as causes. This means that we
cannot distinguish whether the agent’s behavior is the cause,
but only whether the agent has a causal influence on other
agents in the current situation.

Intervention for Causal Inference As discussed above,
the causal relationship between agents depends on the cur-
rent situation rather than the behavior chosen by the agents.

Figure 2: Multi-agent Causal Graph Model.

t , S1

t , A1

t , ..., SN

t , ..., AN

t+1, ..., SN

graphical G (see Figure 2) over the set of random variables
V = {St, St+1, S1
t+1}, con-
sisting of a conditional distribution P (Vi∣P A(Vi)), where
Vi represents an agent’s state component e.g. St, or the
agent’s action component e.g. A1
t . Apart from the actions
computed by the policy π(At∣St), within a time step, there
are no edges, i.e. no transient effects. In the MACGM, the
actions At at the t time step are intended to affect St+1 by
influencing the environment. To better express the causal re-
lationship between actions and states, considering that the
influence of At on St+1 is actually the influence on the en-
vironment at time t+1, thus the influence on the environ-
ment can be differentiated into the influence on the state
Sj
t+1 of each agent j at t+1 time step. Nevertheless, at most
time steps, there should be no instantaneous effects between
agents in the world. In particular, an agent’s sphere of influ-
ence is limited, i.e., its action A can only affect other agents
sparsely, which rests on two basic assumptions about the
causal structure of the world. First, the multi-agent environ-
ment is composed of independent agents, according to the
principle of independent causal mechanism (ICM) (Parunak
2018), which states that the generative process of the world
is composed of autonomous modules. The second assump-
tion is that latent influences between entities are spatially
local and temporally sparse. We can view this as explain-
ing the sparsity mechanism shift hypothesis, which suggests
that natural distribution shift will be caused by changes in
local mechanisms (Sch¨olkopf et al. 2021). This can usually
be traced back to the ICM principle, which states that in-

Environment𝜋𝜃1𝜋𝜃2𝜋𝜃3𝑎𝑡1𝑎𝑡2…𝑎𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑡1𝑜𝑡2𝑜𝑡𝑛Policy:𝝅𝜽𝒊𝑎𝑡=[𝑎𝑡1,𝑎𝑡2,⋯,𝑎𝑡𝑛]𝑟𝑡,𝑒𝑥Store[𝑠𝑡+1𝑗,𝑠𝑡1,𝑎𝑡1][𝑠𝑡+1𝑗,𝑠𝑡2,𝑎𝑡2][𝑠𝑡+1𝑗,𝑠𝑡𝑛,𝑎𝑡𝑛]…NNNNNN…𝜇1,𝑗𝜎1,𝑗𝜇2,𝑗𝜎2,𝑗𝜇𝑛,𝑗𝜎𝑛,𝑗Forward Dynamic ModelTrain MINEState Encoder𝑬𝒔Action Encoder𝑬𝒂𝒔𝒕+𝟏𝒋𝒂𝒕𝒊ෝ𝒂𝒕𝒊𝓤(𝑨)××𝑰𝑴𝑰𝑵𝑬𝑻ψ(𝒔𝒕+𝟏𝒋,ෝ𝒂𝒕𝒊)𝑻ψ(𝒔𝒕+𝟏𝒋,𝒂𝒕𝒊)𝑟𝑡𝑖=𝑟𝑡,𝑒𝑥+𝛼෍𝑖≠𝑗𝑟𝑡,𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑗𝑟𝑡1,𝑗𝑟𝑡2,𝑗𝑟𝑡𝑛,𝑗⋯𝑉Φ𝑖𝑣𝑖Inferring Casual InfluenceTraj1……Traj2TrajNBuffer𝑟𝑡,𝑒𝑥+11212+11+12+1t∣si

t = si

t=π(ai

t → Sj

t+1∣Si
t to Sj

In order to detect whether there is a causal relationship be-
tween agents, we utilize an intervention method to achieve
it. Formally, we define “agent i can causally affect agent j
in the current situation” (or “agent i takes control of agent
j”) if there exists an edge Ai
t+1 in causal graph (as
shown in Figure 2) under all interventions do(Ai
t))
with π having full support. According to Markov property
and the faithfulness assumption of the causal graph model,
t ̸ Sj
if Ai
t, then there must be an unblocked
edge from Ai
t+1 in a causal graph G. Since the path
over Sj
t+1 is blocked by observing Si
t, while assuming no
t → Sj
instantaneous influences, the direct path Ai
t+1 is the
only possible path. Therefore, in causal graph G, there is an
edge Ai
t+1 under the intervention do(Ai
t)) if
t ̸ Sj
Ai
t. The following lemma shows that a conclusion
taken from an intervention generalize to numerous interven-
tions with π having full support (proofs in Suppl. A). Ac-
cording to the lemma, the conclusion from an intervention
can determine whether there is a causal influence between
agents.
t ̸ Sj
Lemma 1 If Ai
t+1 holds under an intervention
t∣si
∶= π(ai
do(Ai
t)), then the dependence holds and the
t
t → Sj
edge Ai
t+1 exits under all interventions with π hav-
ing full support. If Ai
t+1 holds under an intervention
do(Ai
t ∶= π(ai
t)) with π having full support, then the in-
t → Sj
dependence holds and the edge Ai
t+1 does not exit
under all interventions.

t → Sj
t+1∣Si

t Æ Sj

t=π(ai

t∣si

t∣si

t = si

t = si

t+1∣Si

t Æ Sj

t ̸ Sj

Causal Influence Detection between Agents Our goal is
to measure state-dependent causal influence between agents,
which is linked to the independence Ai
t+1∣Si
t or de-
pendence Ai
t. Conditional mutual informa-
tion (CMI) is a well-known measure of dependence, which
is proposed to be utilized as a measure of causal influence
(CI) between agents. If CMI >0, it suggests that Ai
t is nec-
essary to predict Sj
t = si
t is true, and the
causal path Ai
t+1 exists. However, mutual informa-
tion (MI) of continuous variables is notoriously difficult to
compute in real-world settings. Compared to the variational
inference-based approaches, MINE-based algorithms have
shown superior performance. Motivated by MINE, our ap-
proach learns a neural estimate of MI, which utilizes a lower
bound to approximate the MI.

t → Sj

t ̸ Sj

t+1, Ai

t+1∣Si

CI ij ∶= I(Sj

t+1; Ai

t∣Si
t)
∥PSj

= KL(PSj
E
= sup
T ∶Ω→R

t+1,Ai

t∣si
t

p(Sj

t+1,Ai

t∣si

)

⊗ PAi
t∣si
t+1∣si
t
t
t)[T ] − log(E

p(Sj

t+1∣si

t)p(Ai

t∣si

E

≥ sup
ψ∈Ψ

p(Sj

t+1,Ai

t∣si

t)[Tψ] − log(E

p(Sj

t+1∣si

t)p(Ai

t∣si

(2)

(3)
t)[eT ])
(4)
t)[eTψ ]).
(5)

First, the CMI formulation is rewritten as Equation (3)
using the Donsker-Varadhan representation (Donsker and

Varadhan 2010). The input space Ω is a domain of Rd. The
upper bound holds for all functions T such that two expec-
tations are finite. Then, the CMI in the Donsker-Varadhan
representation is derived with a lower bound using the com-
pression lemma in the PAC-Bayes literature in Equation (5)
(Banerjee 2006). The statistical model T is parameterized
by a deep neural network with parameter ψ. In addition,
since the data in the off-policy reinforcement learning algo-
rithm stems from a mixture of different policies, the agent’s
sampling strategy cannot be used for intervention. Fortu-
nately, Lemma 1 has shown that a single policy is sufficient
to demonstrate (in-)dependence. Therefore, we select a uni-
form distribution U(A) over the action space as the inter-
vention policy.

t, ai

t+1∣si

t) and the distribution p(sj

One thing to note is that the forward dynamics model
p(sj
t+1∣si
t) need to be
calculated. The following will elaborate on how to calcu-
late these two distributions. Computing these two distribu-
tions involves representing complex distributions, comput-
ing high-dimensional integrals, and only limited data. In ad-
dition, each state si
t actually can only be seen once in con-
tinuous space. Since methods based on non-parametric es-
timation do not scale well to high dimensions, we address
this issue by learning neural network models with appro-
priately simplifying assumptions. As shown in Figure 1, we
first utilize the sampled data from the buffer to estimate the
transition distribution p(sj
t+1∣si
t), assuming that the tran-
sition distribution is a normal distribution. Then, the for-
ward dynamics model is utilized to compute the transition
marginal distribution p(sj
t+1∣si
t) by marginalizing out the
actions p(sj
t)p(sj
t∣si
t) = ∫ π(ai
t+1∣si
t). Actually, we
utilize Monte-Carlo to approximate the mixture p(sj
t) ≈
t∣si,(k)
K ∑K
1
), instead of integrals. During the
t
training process, the dynamic model p(sj
t) is trained
simultaneously with the statistical network T and agents’
policy network.

k=1 p(sj

t+1, ai

t+1, ai

t+1∣si

t+1∣si

t, ai

t∣si

Training with Causal Influence as Intrinsic Reward
With the causal influence estimations introduced in the pre-
vious subsection, the goal of the following is to learn the
joint policy that maximizes the expected discounted reward,
using causal influence between agents as an intrinsic reward.
Specifically, agent i receives a joint reward, combining the
extrinsic team reward and the intrinsic reward from peer
causal influence, that can be represented as
CI i,j,

(6)

ri
t,total = rt,ex + α ∑
j≠i

i on Sj

where CI i,j represents the causal influence of At
t+1.
α is a hyper-parameter, which is utilized to balance the in-
trinsic reward and the extrinsic reward. The intrinsic reward
t,in of agent i is represented as ri
ri
t,in = ∑j≠i CI i,j. In par-
ticular, each agent needs to learn a policy to maximize the
conventional objective J(π) ∶ J(πi
t,total]. By
maximizing the conventional objective, agent i can take con-
trol of other interested agents. In principle, our proposed in-
trinsic reward mechanism can be combined with different

θ) = E[

∞
∑
t=0

γtri

Algorithm 1: Training algorithm
Initialize: The critic networks ϕ = (ϕ1, ..., ϕn), the actor
networks θ = (θ1, ..., θn), experience replay buffer D
and target networks ϕ
, the parameters of the statistic
networks T , the forward dynamic models f = {fi}n
i=1 and
the state encoder networks e.

, θ

′

′

1: while episode <M do
2:
3:

for t = (1,...,T) do

t).

t+1}n

Collecting st+1={si
i=1 and extrinsic reward
rt,ex by executing joint actions at via collecting
ai
t ∼ πθi(si
end for
Store episode trajectory {st, at,st+1,rt,ex} from the
multi-agent environment to replay buffer D.
Sample a batch data of transition form buffer D.
Update forward dynamic model for each agent i.
Update T via Equation 5.
Compute intrinsic reward ri
t,in = ∑j≠i CI i,j.
ri
Update critic networks via Equation 7 and intrinsic
reward.
Update actor networks via Equation 8.

t,in for each agent i via

4:
5:

6:
7:
8:
9:

10:

11:
12: end while

CTDE-based MARL algorithms. In this work, our method
is built upon MADDPG. The joint action-value function of
each agent i is approximated by the joint action-value net-
work Qϕ by minimizing the following loss

to move in 2D space. Like Cooperative Navigation, Coop-
erative Predator Prey is a well-known evaluation task for
MARL. The Cooperative Line environment is a complex
task environment, where there are M agents and 2 targets,
with the goal of allowing agents to evenly distribute them-
selves on the line between two targets. All algorithms are
trained in a Linux server with a 2.30 GHz Xeon(R) CPU
and two Nvidia 4090 graphics cards. The learning rates of
the critic network and the actor network are set to 0.001.
The discount factor γ is set to 0.95. Each episode lasts up to
25 timesteps. To estimate the transition marginal distribution
p(sj
t), the number K of per Monte-Carlo sample is set
to 64.

t+1∣si

Baselines

To verify the superiority of our method, we employed three
baseline algorithms for comparison, namely PMIC, MAD-
DPG and SI, with a relaxation that all SI agents are equipped
with the social influence reward. Among them, PMIC and
SI are currently state-of-the-art MARL algorithms using in-
trinsic rewards in Multi-Agent Particle Environment (MPE).
Since our proposed algorithm is based on MADDPG, MAD-
DPG is also utilized as a baseline algorithm for compari-
son. Additionally, to verify the effectiveness of the compo-
nents of the proposed method, some ablation studies also
will be provided. Furthermore, considering the significant
role played by the temperature parameters of intrinsic re-
ward in balancing the relative importance between extrinsic
and intrinsic reward, we also provide an experimental study
on the temperature parameters.

LQ(ϕi) = Est,at,rt,st+1∼D[(ˆyi − Qϕi(st, at))2],

(7)

Experimental Results

t,in + γQϕ′

where ˆy = rt + ri
(st+1, πθ′ (st+1)), ϕi indicates
the parameters of critic network, and ϕ
i and θ
are the pa-
rameters of target networks. Then, the policy of agent i is
updated by minimizing the loss

i

′

′

Lπ(θi) = Est∼D[−Qϕi (st, πθ(⋅∣st))],
where θ = (θ1, ..., θn) are the parameters of actor networks.
The training algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.

(8)

Performance Evaluation
To verify the effectiveness of our proposed method, in this
section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate SCIC
on various multi-agent tasks and compare SCIC with state-
of-the-art methods. Moreover, we also evaluate the effective-
ness of the components of the proposed method by ablation
experiments.

Multi-Agent Task Benchmark
We evaluate our proposed approach on three benchmark
multi-agent tasks: Partial Observation Cooperative Preda-
tor Prey, Cooperative Navigation, and Cooperative Line
Control. The benchmarks’ environment is implemented in
a Multi-Agent Particle Environment ((Lowe et al. 2017)),
where agents can follow a dual integrator dynamic model

Since our approach is based on MADDPG with central-
ized training and decentralized executing, we name it SCIC-
MADDPG in the experiments. First, we evaluate the perfor-
mance of our approach and other baseline approaches on Co-
operative Predator Prey with 3, 4, and 5 predators, in which
the policy of predators needs to be trained and the policy of
prey is fixed. Figure 3(a), Figure 3(b), and Figure 3(c) illus-
trate the comparison results of rewards for SCIC-MADDPG,
PMIC, SI, and MDDDPG on Predator-Prey tasks with 3, 4,
5 predators, respectively. We can observe that our SCIC-
MADDPG demonstrates better performance compared to
other algorithms, although there are relatively minor advan-
tages when there are 4 predators in the environment. SCIC-
MADDPG converges to a better reward than MADDPG,
which indicates that the intrinsic reward is indeed conducive
to improving the cooperation among agents. Both PMIC and
SI receive lower rewards, suggesting that promoting agents
to reach significant states is more beneficial for cooperation
between agents than merely focusing on behavior coordina-
tion. From another perspective, enhancing the causal influ-
ence between agents is evidently more conducive to coop-
eration between agents than solely focusing on enhancing
their correlation.

Moreover, we further perform evaluations on the Coop-
erative Navigation task with 3, 4, and 5 robots, which re-
quires each agent to reach a distinct landmark to achieve

(a) Predator Prey (3 agents).

(b) Predator Prey (4 agents)

(a) Ablation Performance.

(b) Temperature Parameters.

Figure 4: Ablation Study.

Ablation study
To further evaluate our proposed approach, we further con-
ducted a series of ablation experiments in this subsec-
tion. Specifically, to evaluate the effectiveness of interven-
tion sampling, we implemented the SCIC w/o Intervention
method, which obtains the action set when estimating causal
effects between agents, not through intervention with a uni-
form distribution, but by sampling from the replay buffer.
The ablation study was conducted on the Predator Prey task
with 5 agents. As shown in Figure 4(a), SCIC-MADDPG
performs significantly better than MADDPG and SCIC w/o
Intervention. The key reason behind this achievement can
be attributed to the fact that the sampling actions in the
off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm originate from a
mixture of different policies, which cannot be utilized to es-
timate causality. The results reveal two facts: 1) Using causal
influence between agents as a Reward Bonus contributes to
enhancing the performance of MARL algorithms by facili-
tating cooperation among agents; 2) The adoption of inter-
vention leads to more accurate estimates of causal influence.

Temperature Parameters α The role of temperature
parameters α is to control
the relative importance be-
tween intrinsic and extrinsic reward. We evaluate SCIC-
MADDPG by varying α values within the range of [0,
0.001,0.01,0.1,0.5] in the Predator Prey task with 5 preda-
tors. As illustrated in Figure 4(b), SCIC-MADDPG with a
temperature value of 0.01 outperforms its performance with
other temperature values.

Conclusion
To promote coordination between agents and encourage ex-
ploration, we propose the SCIC approach, which incorpo-
rates a new intrinsic reward mechanism based on a new co-
operation criterion measured by situation-dependent causal
influence between agents. SCIC encourages agents to ex-
plore states that positively affect other agents by detecting
inter-agent causal influences and utilizing them as intrinsic
rewards, thereby enhancing collaboration and overall perfor-
mance. We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate
the performance of our proposed approach across various
cooperative MARL tasks. Extensive experimental results
prove the effectiveness of our SCIC. In the future, we ex-
pect to further extend SCIC to decentralized training-based
MARL algorithms and model-based MARL algorithms.

(c) Predator Prey (5 agents).

(d) Cooperative Navi. (3 agents).

(e) Cooperative Navi. (4 agents). (f) Cooperative Navi. (5 agents).

(g) Cooperative Line (3 agents). (h) Cooperative Line (5 agents).

Figure 3: Performances comparison of SCIC-MADDPG
with the other three approaches in various multi-agent tasks.

the shortest total distance traveled. From Figure 3(d), Fig-
ure 3(e), and Figure 3(f), we can observe that our SCIC-
MADDPG consistently achieves higher rewards than the
other baseline methods in the Cooperative Navigation tasks
with varying numbers of agents. Furthermore, we evalu-
ate the performance of SCIC-MADDPG on more challeng-
ing Control Line tasks involving 3 and 5 agents, repre-
senting an exceptionally difficult task scenario. The exper-
imental findings illustrated in Figure 3(h) reveal that SCIC-
MADDPG outperforms other methods in the context of a
5-agent scenario. Additionally, Figure 3(g) illustrates that
SCIC-MADDPG achieves superior performance in compar-
ison to SI and MADDPG, while achieving comparable per-
formance to PMIC. In summary, the results of these exper-
iments collectively indicate that SCIC-MADDPG proves to
be an effective approach, consistently outperforming other
methods across various tasks.

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)010203040RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)01020304050RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)01020304050RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)240220200180160140120RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)425400375350325300275250225RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)650600550500450400350RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0123456Time Steps (le6)20181614121086RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0123456Time Steps (le6)20181614121086RewardSCIC-MADDPGPMICSIMADDPG0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)1020304050RewardSCIC-MADDPGSCIC w/o InterventionMADDPG (baseline)0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Time Steps (le6)1020304050Rewardalpha=0.001alpha=0.01alpha=0.1alpha=0.5alpha=0 (baseline)Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No. 2022ZD0119102).

References
Banerjee, A. 2006. On Bayesian bounds. In International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Belghazi, I.; Rajeswar, S.; Baratin, A.; Hjelm, R. D.; and
Courville, A. C. 2018. MINE: Mutual Information Neural
Estimation. CoRR, abs/1801.04062.
Blaes, S.; Pogancic, M. V.; Zhu, J.; and Martius, G.
2019. Control What You Can: Intrinsically Motivated Task-
Planning Agent. In NeurIPS, 12520–12531.
Chalk, M.; Marre, O.; and Tkacik, G. 2016. Relevant sparse
In NIPS,
codes with variational information bottleneck.
1957–1965.
Chen, L.; Guo, H.; Du, Y.; Fang, F.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, W.;
and Yu, Y. 2021. Signal Instructed Coordination in Coop-
In DAI, vol-
erative Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning.
ume 13170 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 185–205.
Springer.
Donsker, M. D.; and Varadhan, S. R. S. 2010. Asympototic
evalution of certain Markov process expectations for large
time, IV. Communications on Pure & Applied Mathematics,
36(2): 183–212.
Foerster, J. N.; Farquhar, G.; Afouras, T.; Nardelli, N.; and
Whiteson, S. 2018. Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gra-
dients. In AAAI, 2974–2982. AAAI Press.
Hjelm, R. D.; Fedorov, A.; Lavoie-Marchildon, S.; Grewal,
K.; Bachman, P.; Trischler, A.; and Bengio, Y. 2019. Learn-
ing deep representations by mutual information estimation
and maximization. In ICLR. OpenReview.net.
Houthooft, R.; Chen, X.; Duan, Y.; Schulman, J.; Turck,
F. D.; and Abbeel, P. 2016. VIME: Variational Information
Maximizing Exploration. In NIPS, 1109–1117.
Iqbal, S.; and Sha, F. 2019. Actor-attention-critic for multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2961–2970. PMLR.
Jaques, N.; Lazaridou, A.; Hughes, E.; G¨ulc¸ehre, C¸ .; Ortega,
P. A.; Strouse, D.; Leibo, J. Z.; and de Freitas, N. 2019. So-
cial Influence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning. In ICML, volume 97 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, 3040–3049. PMLR.
Kim, W.; Jung, W.; Cho, M.; and Sung, Y. 2023. A Varia-
tional Approach to Mutual Information-Based Coordination
for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of
the 2023 International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS 2023, London, United
Kingdom, 29 May 2023 - 2 June 2023, 40–48. ACM.
Kiran, B. R.; Sobh, I.; Talpaert, V.; Mannion, P.; Sallab, A.
A. A.; Yogamani, S. K.; and P´erez, P. 2022. Deep Reinforce-
IEEE
ment Learning for Autonomous Driving: A Survey.
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., 23(6): 4909–4926.
Kolchinsky, A.; Tracey, B. D.; and Wolpert, D. H. 2019.
Nonlinear Information Bottleneck. Entropy, 21(12): 1181.

Lee, T. E.; Zhao, J. A.; Sawhney, A. S.; Girdhar, S.; and
Kroemer, O. 2021. Causal Reasoning in Simulation for
Structure and Transfer Learning of Robot Manipulation
Policies. In ICRA, 4776–4782. IEEE.
Li, P.; Tang, H.; Yang, T.; Hao, X.; Sang, T.; Zheng, Y.; Hao,
J.; Taylor, M. E.; Tao, W.; and Wang, Z. 2022. PMIC: Im-
proving Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Progres-
In ICML, volume
sive Mutual Information Collaboration.
162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 12979–
12997. PMLR.
Liu, M.; Zhou, M.; Zhang, W.; Zhuang, Y.; Wang, J.; Liu,
W.; and Yu, Y. 2020. Multi-Agent Interactions Modeling
with Correlated Policies. arXiv.
Lowe, R.; Wu, Y.; Tamar, A.; Harb, J.; Abbeel, P.; and
Mordatch, I. 2017. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed
In Proceedings of
cooperative-competitive environments.
the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 6382–6393.
Maes, S.; Meganck, S.; and Manderick, B. 2007. Inference
in multi-agent causal models. International Journal of Ap-
proximate Reasoning, 46(2): 274–299.
Mahajan, A.; Rashid, T.; Samvelyan, M.; and Whiteson, S.
2019. MAVEN: Multi-Agent Variational Exploration.
In
NeurIPS, 7611–7622.
Mohamed, S.; and Rezende, D. J. 2015. Variational Infor-
mation Maximisation for Intrinsically Motivated Reinforce-
ment Learning. In NIPS, 2125–2133.
Oliehoek, F. A.; and Amato, C. 2016. A Concise Introduc-
tion to Decentralized POMDPs. Springer Briefs in Intelli-
gent Systems. Springer.
Parascandolo, G.; Rojas-Carulla, M.; Kilbertus, N.; and
Sch¨olkopf, B. 2017. Learning Independent Causal Mech-
anisms. CoRR, abs/1712.00961.
Parunak, H. V. D. 2018. Elements of causal inference:
foundations and learning algorithms. Computing reviews,
59(11): 588–589.
Pitis, S.; Creager, E.; and Garg, A. 2020. Counterfactual
Data Augmentation using Locally Factored Dynamics.
In
NeurIPS.
Rashid, T.; Samvelyan, M.; Schroeder, C.; Farquhar, G.; Fo-
erster, J.; and Whiteson, S. 2018. Qmix: Monotonic value
function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 4295–4304. PMLR.
Sch¨olkopf, B.; Locatello, F.; Bauer, S.; Ke, N. R.; Kalch-
brenner, N.; Goyal, A.; and Bengio, Y. 2021. Towards
Causal Representation Learning. CoRR, abs/2102.11107.
Seitzer, M.; Sch¨olkopf, B.; and Martius, G. 2021. Causal
Influence Detection for Improving Efficiency in Reinforce-
ment Learning. In NeurIPS, 22905–22918.
Shanmugam, R. 2001. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and
Inference : Judea Pearl; Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK, 2000, pp 384, ISBN 0-521-77362-8. Neurocom-
puting, 41(1-4): 189–190.
Sunehag, P.; Lever, G.; Gruslys, A.; Czarnecki, W. M.; Zam-
baldi, V. F.; Jaderberg, M.; Lanctot, M.; Sonnerat, N.; Leibo,

J. Z.; Tuyls, K.; and Graepel, T. 2018. Value-Decomposition
Networks For Cooperative Multi-Agent Learning Based On
Team Reward. In AAMAS, 2085–2087. International Foun-
dation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
Richland, SC, USA / ACM.
Velickovic, P.; Fedus, W.; Hamilton, W. L.; Li`o, P.; Bengio,
Y.; and Hjelm, R. D. 2019. Deep Graph Infomax. In ICLR
(Poster). OpenReview.net.
Wang, T.; Du, X.; Chen, M.; and Li, K. 2023. Hierarchi-
cal Relational Graph Learning for Autonomous Multi-Robot
IEEE
Cooperative Navigation in Dynamic Environments.
Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Cir-
cuits and Systems, 1–1.
Wang, T.; Wang, J.; Wu, Y.; and Zhang, C. 2020. Influence-
Based Multi-Agent Exploration. In ICLR. OpenReview.net.
Wen, Y.; Yang, Y.; Luo, R.; Wang, J.; and Pan, W. 2019.
Probabilistic Recursive Reasoning for Multi-Agent Rein-
forcement Learning. In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net.
Wu, T.; Zhou, P.; Liu, K.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, X.; Huang, H.;
and Wu, D. O. 2020. Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Urban Traffic Light Control in Vehicular Net-
works. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 69(8):
8243–8256.

A Proof of Lemma 1
First, the dependence Ai
tion do(Ai
and ai,1
t

t ∶= π(ai
, ai,2
t

t∣si

t ̸ Sj

t+1∣Si

t = si
t)) signifies that there are some Sj

t under an interven-
t+1,

that satisfy the following conditions:

pdo(Ai
≠ p(sj

t∶=π)(sj
t+1∣si

t, ai,1
t+1∣si
t ) = pdo(Ai
t, ai,2

t ) = p(sj

t+1∣si

t, ai,1
t )
t, ai,2
t )

t∶=π)(sj

t+1∣si
Any π′ with full support would satisfy π′(ai,1
t
π′(ai,2
t
that the dependence Ai
π′).

t) > 0 and
t) > 0. So the following formula holds, implying
t = si
t ∶=

t holds under do(Ai

t ̸ Sj

t+1∣Si

∣si

∣si

pdo(Ai
≠ p(sj

t∶=π′)(sj
t+1∣si
t+1∣Si

t, ai,1
t+1∣si
t ) = pdo(Ai
t = si

t, ai,2

t ) = p(sj

t+1∣si

t∶=π′)(sj

t, ai,1
t )
t, ai,2
t )

t+1∣si

t hold under all intervention with
t → Sj
t+1 exits, implying that Ai
t has

t ̸ Sj
Since Ai
full support, the edge Ai
a causal effect on Sj
t+1.

Second, if the independent Ai

der an intervention do(Ai
support, any intervention do(Ai

t ∶= π(ai

t Æ Sj
t∣si

t = si
t+1∣Si
t hold un-
t)) with π having full

pdo(Ai
= p(Sj

t∶=π′)(Sj
t+1∣si

t+1∣si
t, Ai
t) = pdo(Ai

t ∶= π′) holds that
t) = p(Sj
t∶=π′)(Sj

t+1∣si
t, Ai
t)
t+1∣si
t),

(9)

(10)

where the equation 9 contributes to the autonomy property
of causal mechanisms, the equation 10 is due to the inde-
pendence Ai
t+1∣Si
t+1 holds under
an intervention do(Ai
t∣si
t)) with π having full sup-
port, then the independence holds. So far, Lemma 1 has been
proven.

t = si
t ∶= π(ai

t. So, if Ai

t Æ Sj

t Æ Sj

