0
2
0
2

v
o
N
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
9
7
0
0
.
1
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cooperative Heterogeneous Deep Reinforcement
Learning

Han Zheng
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
Han.Zheng-1@student.uts.edu.au

Pengfei Wei
National University of Singapore
wpf89928@gmail.com

Jing Jiang
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
jing.jiang@uts.edu.au

Guodong Long
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
guodong.long@uts.edu.au

Qinghua Lu
Data61, CSIRO
qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au

Chengqi Zhang
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
Chengqi.Zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Numerous deep reinforcement learning agents have been proposed, and each
In this work, we present a Cooperative
of them has its strengths and ﬂaws.
Heterogeneous Deep Reinforcement Learning (CHDRL) framework that can learn
a policy by integrating the advantages of heterogeneous agents. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a cooperative learning framework that classiﬁes heterogeneous agents into
two classes: global agents and local agents. Global agents are off-policy agents
that can utilize experiences from the other agents. Local agents are either on-policy
agents or population-based evolutionary algorithms (EAs) agents that can explore
the local area effectively. We employ global agents, which are sample-efﬁcient,
to guide the learning of local agents so that local agents can beneﬁt from sample-
efﬁcient agents and simultaneously maintain their advantages, e.g., stability. Global
agents also beneﬁt from effective local searches. Experimental studies on a range of
continuous control tasks from the Mujoco benchmark show that CHDRL achieves
better performance compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) integrates deep neural networks with reinforcement learning
principles, e.g.,Q-learning and policy-gradient, to create a more efﬁcient agent. Recent studies have
shown a great success of DRL in numerous challenging real-world problems, e.g., video games and
robotic control [1]. Although promising, existing DRL algorithms still suffer from several challenges
including sample complexity, instability, and temporal credit assignment problems [2, 3].

One popular research line of DRL is policy-gradient based on-policy methods attempting to evaluate
or improve the same policy that is used to make decisions [4], e.g., trust region policy optimization
(TRPO) [5] and proximal policy optimization (PPO) [6]. Recent works [7, 8] have proved that
policy-gradient based methods can converge to a stationary point under some conditions, which
theoretically guarantees their stability. However, they are extremely sample-expensive since they
require new samples to be collected in each gradient step [4].

On the contrary, Q-learning based off-policy methods, which is another research line evaluating or
improving a policy different from the one that is used to generate the behavior, can improve sample

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The high-level structure of CHDRL for one iteration

efﬁciency by reusing past experiences [4]. Existing off-policy based methods include deep Q-learning
network (DQN) [1] and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [9] etc. These methods involve the approximation of
some high-dimensional and nonlinear functions, usually through deep neural networks, which poses
a signiﬁcant challenge on convergence and stability [10, 3]. It is also well known that off-policy Q
learning is not to converge even with linear function approximation [11]. Moreover, recent studies
[12, 13] identify some other key sources of instability for off-policy methods, i.e., bootstrapping and
extrapolation errors. As shown in [12], off-policy methods are highly sensitive to data distribution,
and can only make limited progress without exploiting additional on-policy data.

In addition to the pros and cons discussed above, on-policy and off-policy methods based on temporal
difference learning suffer from some common issues. The one that received much research attention
is the so-called temporal credit assignment problem [2]. When rewards become sparse or delayed,
which is quite common in real-world problems, DRL algorithms may yield an inferior performance
as reward sparsity downgrades the learning efﬁciency and hinders exploration. To alleviate this issue,
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [14, 15] have recently been introduced to DRL [16, 17]. The usage of
a ﬁtness metric that consolidates returns across the entire episode makes EAs indifferent to reward
sparsity and robust to long time horizons [18]. However, EAs suffer from high sample complexity
and struggle to solve high-dimension problems involving massive parameters.

In this paper, we are interested in an algorithm that takes the essence and discards the dross of
different DRL algorithms to achieve high sample efﬁciency and maintain good stability in various
continuous control tasks. To do so, we propose a framework called CHDRL. Speciﬁcally, CHDRL
works on an agent pool containing three classes of agents: an off-policy agent, an on-policy agent,
and a opulation-based EAs agent. All the agents cooperate based on the following three mechanisms.

Firstly, all agents collaboratively explore the solution space following a hierarchical policy transfer
rule. As the off-policy agent is sample-efﬁcient, we take it as the global agent to obtain a relatively
good policy or value function at the beginning. The on-policy agent and the population-based EAs
agent are taken as local agents and start their exploration with the prior knowledge transferred from
the global agent. As the EAs agent is population-based, we further allow it to accept policies from
the on-policy agent.

Secondly, we employ a local-global memory replay to enable global (off-policy) agents to replay the
newly generated experiences by local (on-policy) agents more frequently so that global agents can
beneﬁt from local search. Note that, with policy transfer as stated above, local agents start exploration
with a policy transferred from global agents, and thus their generated experiences can be taken as
close to the on-policy data of global agents’ current policy [12, 13]. By allowing global agents
exploits more often from these local experiences, we can alleviate the bootstrapping or extrapolation
error and further boost global agents’ learning. Consequently, global agents provide a better starting
point for local agents who in turn generate more diverse local experiences for global agents’ replay,
which forms a good win-win cycle.

Thirdly, although we encourage the cooperation among agents in exploration, we also tend to
maintain the independence of each agent; that is, we do not want the learning of local agents to be
completely dominated by that of global agents. This is to enable each agent to still maintain its policy
updating scheme and preserve its learning advantage. To do so, we ﬁrstly develop a loosely coupled
hierarchical framework with global agents at the upper-level and local agents at the lower-level1.
Such a framework not only makes each agent generally run in a relatively independent environment

1Policy transfer only happens from upper-level agents to lower-level agents.

2

with different random settings, but also achieves the easy and ﬂexible deployment or replacement
of the agent candidates used in the framework. Secondly, to avoid over-policy-transfer, i.e., policy
transfer happening too frequently thus interrupting the learning stability of local agents, we set a
threshold to control the frequency of policy transfer.

The high-level structure of CHDRL is shown in Figure 1. In this work, we instantiated a CHDRL
with PPO, SAC, and Cross-Entropy-Method (CEM) based EA [19], named CPSC. Experimental
studies showed the superiority of CPSC to several state-of-the-art baselines in a range of continuous
control benchmarks. We also conducted ablation studies to verify the three mechanisms.

2 Preliminaries

In this section, we review the representation of on-policy method, off-policy method, and EAs,
namely, PPO [6], SAC [9], and Cross-Entropy based EA [19].

2.1 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)

PPO is an on-policy algorithm that trains a stochastic policy.
It explores by sampling actions
according to the latest version of its stochastic policy. During training, the policy typically becomes
progressively less random, as the update rule encourages it to exploit rewards that it has already
found. PPO tries to keep new policies close to old.

2.2 Soft Actor-critic (SAC)

SAC is an off-policy algorithm that incorporates an entropy measure of the policy into the reward
to encourage exploration. The idea is to learn a policy that acts as randomly as possible while still
being able to succeed in the task. It is an off-policy actor-critic model that follows the maximum
entropy RL framework. The policy is trained with the objective of maximizing the expected return
and entropy at the same time.

2.3 Evolutionary Algorithms and CEM-ES

EAs [14, 15] are a class of black-box search algorithms that apply heuristic search procedures inspired
by natural evolution. Among EAs, Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs) are a speciﬁc
family where the population is represented as a distribution using a covariance matrix [20]. CEM is a
simple EDA where the number of elite individuals is ﬁxed at a certain value. After all individuals of
a population are evaluated, the top ﬁttest individuals are used to compute the new mean and variance
of the population.

3 Related Works

Experience replay mechanism [21] is widely used in off-policy reinforcement learning to improve
sample efﬁciency. DQN [1] randomly and uniformly samples experience from a replay memory. [22]
subsequently expands DQN to develop a prioritized experience replay (PER), which uses a temporal
difference error to prioritize experiences. Zhizheng Zhang et al. [23] introduce an episodic control
experience replay method to quickly latch on to good trajectories. Our local-global memory uses a
different strategy: let the off-policy agent learn more from effective on-policy experiences.

CHDRL’s cooperative learning mechanism can be discussed in terms of guided policy search (GPS)
[24, 25] or evolutionary reinforcement learning (ERL) [16, 17, 26]. For GPS, they generally need to
use the KL divergence to guide how policies are improved. ERL [17] directly transfers the RL agent’s
policy to the EA population, while Pourchot et al. [16] uses the RL’s critic to update half of the EA
population using the gradient-based technique. The proposed CHDRL is related to GPS and ERL in
the sense that multiple polices work in a hybrid way. However, the main difference between CHDRL
and other similar methods is how heterogeneous agents cooperate. Moreover, CHDRL can beneﬁt
not just from off-policy and EA learning schemes but also from the on-policy learning scheme.

Another related area of work is in the training architectures. A3C [27] introduce an asynchronous
training framework for deep reinforcement learning, showing parallel actor-learners have a stabilizing

3

effect on training. Babaeizadeh et al. [28] adapt this approach to make efﬁcient use of GPUs.
IMPALA [29] uses a central learner to run SGD while asynchronously pulling sample batches from
many actor processes. Horgan et al. [30] proposes a distributed architecture for training DRL that
employs many actors to explore using different policies and prioritizing the generated experiences.
Han Zheng et al. [31] introduces a training method to select the best agent for different tasks. All
these methods only focus on one learning scheme, and/or all actors involved are treated equally. On
the contrary, CHDRL distinguishes actors as global actors and local actors that serve for different
purposes respectively. Moreover, CHDRL focuses on the cooperation of diverse learning schemes.

4 Cooperative Heterogeneous Deep Reinforcement Learning(CHDRL)

In this section, we ﬁrstly introduce the proposed CHDRL framework and then suggest a practical
algorithm based on it. Our CHDRL mainly follows three mechanisms to achieve cooperative learning
of heterogeneous agents: cooperative exploration (CE), local-global memory relay (LGM) and
distinctive update (DU).

Cooperative Exploration (CE). The key idea of CE is to utilize a sample-efﬁcient agent, such as
an off-policy agent, to guide the exploration of the agent with a relatively lower sample efﬁciency,
e.g., an on-policy agent. This is done by transferring policies across agents. More precisely, the
sample-efﬁcient agent acts as a global agent and conducts a global search ﬁrst. In every iteration, we
want to use the policy and/or value function obtained by the global agent as the prior knowledge to
re-initialize local agents so that they can start to exploit from a relatively better position. To do so, we
need to solve three key points: what to transfer, how to transfer, and when to transfer, following the
basic mechanism of transfer learning[32, 33].

What to Transfer. Different agents may have different policy architectures. The policy could be
.
deterministic, where it is denoted by a
= µφ(s), or stochastic, where it is denoted by a ∼ πφ(·|s). In
continuous control tasks, the stochastic policy is usually assumed to be sampled from a Gaussian
distribution, and thus it can be represented as:
.
= µφ(s) + Σ

a

where µφ(s) is the mean action, Σ represent a covariance matrix. Typically, Σ may have different
forms, e.g., PPO uses a state-independent Σ while SAC utilizes a state-dependent one. However, a
similar mean policy architecture µφ(s) is used in different methods. Inspired by this, we propose to
use the structurally identical mean function µφ(s) to establish a link between the deterministic and
stochastic policies. Then the policy among heterogeneous agents can be shared by transferring µφ(s).

How to Transfer. As shown in Figure 1, policies are transferred following a hierarchical manner. The
principle is that policies are transferred from upper-level agents with higher sample efﬁciency to the
lower-level agents with lower sample efﬁciency. More speciﬁcally, policies are transferred (1) from
off-policy agents to both on-policy agents and EAs agents, and (2) from on-policy agents to EAs
agents. Note that EAs agents are population-based, and thus we allow them to accept the on-policy
agent’s policy to maximize the transfer capacity. To avoid collisions, we use different individuals of
EAs’ population to accept policies from different upper-level agents. As EAs agents accept policies
from both off-policy and on-policy agents, they naturally serve as a pool that stores all the transferred
policies.

When to Transfer. Policy transfer happens only when upper-level agents ﬁnd a better policy than
the current one of lower-level agents. Lower-level agents then re-initialize the exploration with the
policy transferred from their upper-level agents as the new starting point. In order to compare the
performance of policies, we use the average return as the evaluation metric. To be statistically stable,
we use the average return over ﬁve episodes as the policy’s performance score. Moreover, to avoid
that policy transfer happens too frequently to interrupt the learning stability of lower-level agents, we
enable policy transfer only when the performance gap is larger than a predeﬁned threshold.

Local-Global Memory Relay (LGM): Off-policy agents can make more progress when considering
on-policy data in their learning [12, 13]. Following this observation, we employ a local-global memory
replay mechanism to enable global off-policy agents to beneﬁt from diverse local experiences from
both on-policy agents and EAs agents. In particular, we propose two memory buffers – a global
one and a local one – to store the generated exploration experiences. The global memory serves to
store the entire exploration experiences of all the agents, while the local memory only stores the

4

Algorithm 1 CSPC

Require:

TRAIN(Gs, Tg), t ← t + Tg
for Agent a in Gs, Lp, Lc do
TRAIN(a, Ml, Mg, T )
if a is not Gs then

.
= µφs (s) + Σs and value ψs;
Gs with policy πs
.
Lp with πp
= µφp (s) + Σp and value ψp; local
memory Ml,global memory Mg; Iteration steps T ;
(s), ..., µφcn (s); initial
Lc with policies as µφc0
steps Tg; gap f , terminate step Tm, and initial test
score Ss, Sp Sc. Initialize transfer label Ap, Ac to
False.
1: repeat
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20: until t > Tm

end for
Update test scores Ss, Sp and Sc
if Ss − Sp > f then

end if
if Sp − Sc > f then

end if
if Ss − Sc > f then

φp ← φs, ψp ← ψs, Ap ←True

UPDATE(φs, Ml, Mg, T )

φc0 ← φs, Ac ←True

end if
t ← t + T

φc1 ← φp

end if

Algorithm 2 TRAIN

Require:

Input agent a,
training steps Ta,
episode reward R = 0,
Rm ← min(Ss, Sp, Sc),
step t = 0, te = 0,
global memory Mg,local memory Ml
episode memory Me.

1: repeat
2:

3:
4:

5:
6:
7:
8:

9:

(s)

.
= µφci

Observe state s and select action a ∼ µφs (s) +
Σs or a ∼ µφp (s) + Σp or a
Execute a in the environment
Observe next state s(cid:48),reward r,and done signal
d
Store (s, a, r, s(cid:48), d) in Me, R ← r + R
t ← t + 1, te ← te + 1
if s(cid:48) is terminal then

φ(cid:48) ← UPDATE(φ, Mg, Ml, te) where φ ∈
{φs, φp, φc}
if R > Rm and (a is Gs or Ap or Ac is True)
then

Store Me in Ml and Mg

else

10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: until t > Ta

end if

Store Me in Mg

end if
R ← 0, Me ← [], te ← 0

recently generated ones. Thus, we set an expandable global memory size increasing while learning,
but a ﬁxed shared memory size with a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out rule. Whenever new experiences arrive, the
earliest saved experiences in local memory are overridden. We aim to use the experience saved in the
local memory to simulate on-policy data. However, instead of exploiting a brute-force storage that
indiscriminately saves every new episode experience, we set an intuitive rule to determine whether to
store an experience in local memory or not. Speciﬁcally, we only save a newly generated episode
from a local agent when (1) the local agent successfully accepts a policy from the global agent 2, and
(2) when its episode return is not worse than the minimum of all agents’ current performance. By
doing so, we can avoid out-of-distribution data being saved in local memory to some extent, so as
to reduce variance and stabilize learning [12]. We then allow global agents to replay experiences
from the two memories drawn from a Bernoulli distribution, that is, sample experiences from the
local memory with a probability p, and from the global memory with a probability 1 − p. Such a
Local-Global Memory Relay mechanism plays a very important role in guaranteeing global agents
to consistently beneﬁt from on-policy data as, if only a single global memory buffer is used, the
probability of sampling a newly generated experience in it becomes lower and lower with more and
more experiences saved alongside learning.

Distinctive Update (DU): Although global agents guide local agents for exploration, each agent still
maintains its own policy updating schemes to preserve learning advantages. When an agent accepts a
policy from its upper-level agent, it keeps updating using its update algorithms, e.g., policy gradient,
starting from the accepted policy. This is naturally achieved by the hierarchical framework stated
above as well as by the performance gap determining when to transfer.

To understand CHDRL better, we provide a CHDRL instantiation, which employs a state-of-the-art
off-policy agent SAC, an on-policy agent PPO and EAs agent CEM, called Cooperative SAC-PPO-
CEM (CSPC). The pseudo code of the instantiated CSPC is presented in detail in algorithms 1 to 3.
Gs, Lp, Lc represent global off-policy agent SAC, local on-policy agent PPO and EA agent CEM
respectively. Algorithm 1 shows the general learning ﬂow of CSPC. Firstly, global agent Gs is

2It ensures the local experiences are close to the on-policy data of the global agent’s current policy.

5

Algorithm 3 UPDATE

Require:

Agent aφ, update steps tu, step t = 0, sample probability p; Global shared memory Mg, local memory Ml;

else

1: if a is G then
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12: end if
13: if a is Lp then
14:
15: end if
16: if a is Lc then
17:
18:
19: end if

end while

while t < tu do

o ← Bernoulli(k, p) with k ∈ {0, 1}
if o = 1 then

Randomly sample a batch B from Ml

Randomly sample a batch B from Mg

end if
Update agent’s policy φs and value function ψs following [6]
t ← t + 1

Update agent’s policy φp and value function ψp following [9].

Update agent’s new mean πµc and covariance matrix (cid:80)
Draw the current population Lc from N (πµc , Σc),

c following [19].

trained for speciﬁc steps Tg. This is to ensure the off-policy agent reaches a relatively good solution.
Afterwards, we orderly train Gs, Lp, and Lc to search the solution space for one iteration step T .
Note that Gs keeps learning from the experiences when other agents explore. After that, we evaluate
the updated agent to get its new policy score Ss, Sp and Sc. We then transfer policies based on these
updated scores following the above principle of policy transfer. Speciﬁcally, if the score of Ss is
better than those of Sp and Sc with at least f improvement, we re-initialize Lp and one individual of
Lc with Gs’s policy. A similar transfer is done from Lp to Lc.

Algorithm 1 shows what, how, and when to transfer policies, which are the three key factors in CE.
Lines 9-13 in Algorithm 2 show how generated experiences are stored in global memory or local
memory. Lines 3-8 in Algorithm 3 show how global agents replay experiences from the global and
local memories. These lines combined consist of the implementation of LGM. Lastly, lines 9, 14,
and 17 reﬂect DU, where each agent updates following its own update rules. The above procedure
proceeds iteratively until termination.

Note that CHDRL also accepts the same type of agents. In this case, cooperation only exists between
the global agent and local agent, not across local ones. In the ablation study, we test a case where
three off-policy agents are used in CHDRL. Moreover, our CHDRL is loosely coupled in the sense
that it is ﬂexible enough to involve any other agents, e.g., DQN [1] and TRPO [5] etc., into it.

5 Experiments

We conducted an empirical evaluation to verify the performance superiority of CSPC to other
baselines, and ablation studies to show the effectiveness of each mechanism used in CHDRL.

5.1 Experiment Setup

All the evaluations were done on a continuous control benchmark: Mujoco [34]. We used state-of-the-
art SAC, PPO and CEM to represent the off-policy agent, on-policy agent, and EA, respectively. Note
that other off-policy (e.g., TD3), on-policy (e.g., TRPO) and gradient-free agents (e.g. CEM-ES), are
applicable to our framework. For SAC, PPO and CEM, we used the code from OpenAISpinningUp
for the ﬁrst two, and code from CEM-RL for CEM 3. For hyper-parameters in these methods, we
followed the defaults speciﬁed by the authors. For CSPC, we set the gap f as 100, global agent initial
learning steps Tg as 5e4, iteration time steps T as 1e4, global memory size Mg as 1e6, local memory
size Ml as 2e4, and sample probability from local memory p as 0.3.

3OpenAISpinningUp: github.com/openai/spinningup; CEM-RL:github.com/apourchot/CEM-RL

6

(a) Hopper-v2

(b) Walker2d-v2

(c) Ant-v2

(d) Humanoid-v2

(e) Swimmer-v2

Figure 2: Training curves on Mujoco continuous control tasks.

Table 1: The max average return.
PPO

CSPC

SAC

Task

CEM

Task

Humanoid-v2 Ant-v2 Walker2d-v2 Hopper-v2

Swimmer-v2

Table 2: The elite agent.

Humanoid-v2
Ant-v2
Walker2d-v2
Hopper-v2
Swimmer-v2

5412±239
5337±220
5317±256
3619±52
261±117

626±23
1169±207
1389±387
2923±88
68±31

5142±133
3766±2359
4222±290
3558 ±139
44±3

616±88
1019±33
1041±65
1057±53
274±118

seed 0
seed 1
seed 2
seed 3
seed 4

SAC
CEM
PPO
PPO
SAC

SAC
SAC
CEM
CEM
PPO

PPO
CEM
CEM
CEM
CEM

CEM
CEM
CEM
SAC
CEM

CEM
CEM
CEM
CEM
CEM

5.2 Comparative Evaluation

We evaluated CSPC on ﬁve continuous control tasks from Mujoco in comparison to three baselines:
SAC, PPO, and CEM. We also used SAC, CEM, and PPO as our candidate agents in CSPC. We ran
the training process for all the methods over one million time steps on four tasks with ﬁve different
seeds, and for the Swimmer-v2 task, we ran it for four million time steps. Time steps are accumulated
interaction steps with the environment. For a fair comparison, we used the accumulated time steps
of three algorithms used in CSPC. Speciﬁcally, we summed up each agent’s time steps so that the
total time-steps stayed consistent with the other baselines. The ﬁnal performance was reported as the
max average return of 5 independent trials for each seed. We reported the scores of all the methods
compared against the number of time steps.

Figure 2 shows the comparison results for all methods on ﬁve Mujoco learning tasks. From the results,
we ﬁrst observe that there is no clear winner among the existing state-of-the-art baselines SAC, PPO,
and CEM in terms of stability and sample efﬁciency. No one consistently outperforms the others on
the ﬁve learning tasks. Speciﬁcally, it can be seen that, for four of ﬁve tasks (except for Swimmer
task), SAC yields better results than PPO and CEM, which veriﬁes its sample efﬁciency for a long
run. However, we can also observe a signiﬁcant variance of SAC, which indicates its high instability,
especially in Ant task. In contrast, PPO and CEM have a lower variance but achieve unsatisfactory
average returns. A special case is Swimmer task where both SAC and PPO fail to learn a good policy
but CEM succeeds. Figure 2 also demonstrates that our proposed CSPC performs consistently better
or with comparable results to the best baseline methods on all tasks. This veriﬁes the capability
of CSPC to improve the performance of each individual agent by utilizing the cooperation among
them. On Swimmer task where both gradient-based methods fail, CSPC still achieves a comparable
result with CEM. This is because CSPC does not beneﬁt from SAC and PPO, and only maintains the
capacity of CEM. Table 1 shows the maximum average return for each method.

One may wonder about the possible computation cost of CPSC. In our experiments, it mainly comes
from the global agent, as it keeps learning for other agents’ experiences in the background. The local
agents run much faster than global agents, especially the CEM agent, as it is gradient-free. The total
running time of CSPC is only slightly longer than the SAC agent.

7

(a) Walker2d-v2

(b) Walker2d-v2

(c) Walker2d-v2

(d) Swimmer-v2

(e) Swimmer-v2

(f) Swimmer-v2

Figure 3: Ablation study on two tasks: Walker2d and Swimmer.

5.3 Local Agent vs Global Agent

The main motivation of this study is to ﬁgure out whether local agents really help in ﬁnding the best
ﬁnal policy in different random settings. To do so, we show the elite agent, that is, the agent yielding
the best performance among heterogenous agents after training has terminated, in different random
seeds. The results are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that CSPC could obtain different elite agents
on the same task under different random seeds. Such an observation indicates that local search agents
do help to ﬁnd a better policy around the global guided agent. Surprisingly, the EA-based CEM
agent performs better than other local agent (PPO) in most cases. However, on the complex task,
Humanoid-v2, the gradient-based agents perform much better than CEM.

5.4 Ablation Studies

In this section, we conducted ablation studies to understand the contributions of each key component
of CSPC. To do this, we built three variants of CSPC: CSPC without cooperative exploration (CE),
i.e., CSPC-CE, CSPC without local memory(LM), i.e., CSPC-LM, and CSPC without global memory
(GM), i.e., CSPC-GM. Speciﬁcally, in CSPC-CE, we stopped the policy transfer and let each agent
explore and exploit by itself. In CSPC-LM, the off-policy agent SAC replays from all experiences
uniformly. In CSPC-GM, the off-policy agent SAC only learns from its own experiences. We further
analyzed the inﬂuence of each individual agent to CSPC. To do so, we developed a CSPC without
PPO, called CSPC-PPO, a CSPC without CEM, called CSPC-CEM, and a CSPC without SAC, called
CSPC-SAC. As CHDRL also allows the same types of agents, to verify that heterogeneous agents
indeed matters, a variant of CHDRL consisting of only one type of agent was proposed. In this case,
we introduced two variants: three SAC agents with CE and LGM, and three SAC agents without
them. We called the former C3SAC and the latter 3SAC. For 3SAC, the three agents only shared
global memory and no policy transfer existed. We evaluated all the variants on Walker2d-v2 and
Swimmer-v2. The results are shown in Figure 3.

As shown in Figure 3, for task Walker2d-v2, CSPC achieved the best among all the ablation variants
in terms of ﬁnal average performance. From Figure 3(a), it is easy to deduce that LGM and CE
indeed matter in CSPC, as without these two elements, the ﬁnal performance drops quickly. From
Figure 3(b), we can see that the results of CSPC-PPO and CSPC-CEM are satisfactory and only
slightly worse than that of CSPC, while the result of CSPC-SAC dramatically decreases. This implies
that the global agent has a more signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnal performance than local agents. This
is reasonable as the global agent determines the starting position of CSPC, and highly affects the
following search efﬁciency. Note that CSPC-PPO and CSPC-CEM are CSPC without one speciﬁc
local agent, but still follow CHDRL’s core mechanism: CE and LGM. From the fact that their
performances are much higher than CSPC-CE and CSPC-LM/GM, we again verify the signiﬁcance

8

of LGM and CE. From Figure 3(c), we can see that C3SAC performs better than 3SAC and SAC.
Even though the three agents are with the same type, local agents still provide a diverse local search
as they explore in different random settings. However, our CSPC performs much better than C3SAC,
while 3SAC performs only slightly better than SAC. With this, we deduce that CHDRL still improves
the performance when using the same type agents, but using heterogeneous agents would further
boost the performance.

For the Swimmer-v2 task, the results are different as SAC and PPO agents typically fail on this
task. In other words, the global agent is incapable of ﬁnding a relatively good position, and only
the CEM agent works. The most likely explanation is that in Swimmer-v2, existing DRL methods
provide deceptive gradient information that is detrimental to convergence towards efﬁcient policy
parameters [16]. Hence, LM/GM/CL cannot enhance the ﬁnal performance, which is shown by
CSPC-LM,CSPC-GM and CSPC-CL in Figure 3 (d). In such a case, the learning curves of the
three methods mostly overlap. On the other hand, CSPC-PPO and CSPC-SAC gain a better ﬁnal
performance than CSPC, which is also reasonable as the CEM agent has more iterations leading to a
better ﬁnal performance, as shown in Figure 3(e). For the same reason, C3SAC and 3SAC both fail.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we present CHDRL, a framework that incorporates the beneﬁts of off-policy agents,
policy gradient on-policy agents and EAs agents. The proposed CHDRL is based on three key
mechanisms, i.e., cooperation exploration, local-global memory and distinctive update. We also
provide a practical algorithm CSPC by using SAC, PPO, and CEM. Experiments in a range of
continuous control tasks show that CSPC achieves a better or comparable performance compared
with baselines. We also note that CHDRL introduces some new hyper-parameters which may have
a crucial impact on performance, however, we do not tune that too much. Moreover, we should
carefully select the agents, as the ﬁnal performance highly depends on the agents used, particularly
the global one.

Broader Impact

The DRL agent that learns from an incompletely known environment runs the risk of making wrong
decisions. This could lead to catastrophic consequences in practice, such as automated driving,
the stock market, or medical robots. One approach to alleviate this risk is to combine with other
techniques or involve human beings’ supervision. In terms of beneﬁts, DRL can be deployed in a
safe environment where a wrong decision will not lead to a signiﬁcant loss, e.g., the recommendation
system. Moreover, in some environments that we can simulate well, it would be very promising to
develop an intelligent robot to work in such an environment.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

This research is partially funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Research
Council (ARC) under grant LP180100654.

References

[1] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G
Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al.
Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.

[2] Richard S Sutton. Temporal credit assignment in reinforcement learning. 1985.
[3] Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David
In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on

Meger. Deep reinforcement learning that matters.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.

[4] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 2011.
[5] John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889–1897, 2015.

9

[6] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal

policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[7] Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural policy gradient methods:

Global optimality and rates of convergence. September 2019.

[8] Boyi Liu, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural trust region/proximal policy
optimization attains globally optimal policy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 10564–10575, 2019.

[9] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.01290, 2018.

[10] Shalabh Bhatnagar, Doina Precup, David Silver, Richard S Sutton, Hamid R Maei, and Csaba
Szepesvári. Convergent temporal-difference learning with arbitrary smooth function approxi-
mation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1204–1212, 2009.
[11] Leemon Baird. Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation. In

Machine Learning Proceedings 1995, pages 30–37. Elsevier, 1995.

[12] Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 11761–11771, 2019.

[13] S Fujimoto, D Meger, and D Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without exploration.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02900, 2018.

[14] David B Fogel and Evolutionary Computation. Toward a new philosophy of machine intelligence.

IEEE Evolutionary Computation, 1995.

[15] William M Spears, Kenneth A De Jong, Thomas Bäck, David B Fogel, and Hugo De Garis. An
overview of evolutionary computation. In European Conference on Machine Learning, pages
442–459. Springer, 1993.

[16] Aloïs Pourchot and Olivier Sigaud. Cem-rl: Combining evolutionary and gradient-based

methods for policy search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

[17] Shauharda Khadka and Kagan Tumer. Evolution-guided policy gradient in reinforcement
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1188–1200, 2018.
[18] Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies

as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.

[19] Freek Stulp and Olivier Sigaud. Path integral policy improvement with covariance matrix

adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.4621, 2012.

[20] Pedro Larrañaga and Jose A Lozano. Estimation of distribution algorithms: A new tool for

evolutionary computation, volume 2. Springer Science & Business Media, 2001.

[21] Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and

teaching. Machine learning, 8(3-4):293–321, 1992.

[22] Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay.

In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

[23] Zhizheng Zhang, Jiale Chen, Zhibo Chen, and Weiping Li. Asynchronous episodic deep deter-
ministic policy gradient: Towards continuous control in computationally complex environments.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00827, 2019.

[24] Dibya Ghosh, Avi Singh, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Divide-and-

conquer reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09874, 2017.

[25] Whiyoung Jung, Giseung Park, and Youngchul Sung. Population-guided parallel policy search
for reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[26] Shauharda Khadka, Somdeb Majumdar, Tarek Nassar, Zach Dwiel, Evren Tumer, Santiago
Miret, Yinyin Liu, and Kagan Tumer. Collaborative evolutionary reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

[27] Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lilli-
crap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep
reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1928–1937,
2016.

10

[28] Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Iuri Frosio, Stephen Tyree, Jason Clemons, and Jan Kautz. Reinforce-
ment learning through asynchronous advantage actor-critic on a gpu. International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2017.

[29] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
Scalable distributed deep-RL with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jennifer
Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1407–1416,
Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR.

[30] Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Has-
selt, and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2018.

[31] Han Zheng, Jing Jiang, Pengfei Wei, Guodong Long, and Chengqi Zhang. Competitive and
cooperative heterogeneous deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’20, page 1656–1664,
Richland, SC, 2020.

[32] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning.

IEEE Transactions on

knowledge and data engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.

[33] Pengfei Wei, Yiping Ke, and Chi Keong Goh. Deep nonlinear feature coding for unsupervised

domain adaptation. In IJCAI, pages 2189–2195, 2016.

[34] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based
control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages
5026–5033. IEEE, 2012.

11

