Parallel Knowledge Transfer in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

1st Yongyuan Liang
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, United States
liangyy58@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

2nd Bangwei Li
School of Mathematics
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
libw5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

0
2
0
2

r
a

M
9
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
0
3
1
.
3
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a standard
framework for modeling multi-agent interactions applied in real-
world scenarios. Inspired by experience sharing in human groups,
learning knowledge parallel reusing between agents can poten-
tially promote team learning performance, especially in multi-
task environments. When all agents interact with the environment
and learn simultaneously, how each independent agent selectively
learns from other agents’ behavior knowledge is a problem that
we need to solve. This paper proposes a novel knowledge transfer
framework in MARL, PAT (Parallel Attentional Transfer). We
design two acting modes in PAT, student mode and self-learning
mode. Each agent in our approach trains a decentralized student
actor-critic to determine its acting mode at each time step. When
agents are unfamiliar with the environment, the shared attention
mechanism in student mode effectively selects learning knowledge
from other agents to decide agents’ actions. PAT outperforms
state-of-the-art empirical evaluation results against the prior ad-
vising approaches. Our approach not only signiﬁcantly improves
team learning rate and global performance, but also is ﬂexible
and transferable to be applied in various multi-agent systems.

Index Terms—Reinforcement Learning, Multi-Agent System,

Attention, Transfer Learning

I. INTRODUCTION

Knowledge transfer is a common method in the general
learning process of a new task or in a new environment.
The educational behavior in human society is an advanced
form of knowledge transfer. In a multi-agent system, when
an agent
in an unfamiliar environment and learn to get
more reward, the knowledge from other experienced agents
is beneﬁcial to the agent. Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1],
as a popular framework, has been employed in sequential
decision-making problems. And Transfer Learning (TL) [2]
aims to improve learning through the learning experience
from a related task, which also means knowledge reusing. In
Reinforcement Learning domains, the source of informative
knowledge varies from experienced agents(experts) to human
guidance. In this paper, we work on applying knowledge
transfer method in agents’ behavior transfer for multi-agent
team.

Cooperative Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has been applied in a series of meaningful problems such as
multi-robot control [3] and team-game playing [4]. In Cooper-
ative MARL, if an individual agent’s learning is simply seen
as independent RL with partial observations, the interactions

between agents and the non-stationary environment will cause
signiﬁcant difﬁculties. To accelerate the team-wide learning
efﬁciency and maximize the advantage of knowledge-transfer
in the multi-agent domain, this paper targets the problem of
optimizing knowledge-transfer between agents in Cooperative
MARL under local constraints with a joint task or multiple
tasks.

Our work is different from prior works that study inter-
agent communication mechanisms in cooperative MARL [5]–
[7]. These works require a centralized critic and decentralized
execution framework. Considering the scale of an agent team
in the real scenarios, centralized training is challenging con-
sidering training stability and high computation complexity
with large computational costs. Jiang & Lu [8] and Das et al.
[9] both proposed attention based communication protocol to
exchange messages in MARL domains [8], [9], but these ap-
proaches did not consider agents’ behavior knowledge. Com-
munication methods in MARL domains are always designed
for solve the problem of efﬁcient sharing partial observation
information. In a fully decentralized system, we try to ﬁnd
a method to reuse agents’ experience information to guide
the unfamiliar agents with less communication costs for the
goal of improving team-wide learning. Our work concerns
behavior knowledge reusing problem between cooperative
agents with a teacher-student framework in order to improve
team-wide performance in learning process, relevant to multi-
agent teaching.

Regarding privacy constraints and communication cost in a
multi-agent team, the main issues to be concerned are knowl-
edge transfer decision, knowledge selection, and knowledge
utilization. Invalid or confusing messages from other agents
may cause a negative impact on agents’ individual learning.
Also, in an environment where information interaction is fre-
quent, there is a danger of risk contagion, resulting in poor per-
formance of the entire team. For instance, the phenomenon of
”over-advising” mentioned in previous studies, has increased
team-wide learning instability, especially in a team with more
than two agents. In order to improve knowledge commu-
nication efﬁciency, we introduce an attention mechanism to
dynamically distill knowledge from other agents’ experience.
Crucially, attention mechanism as a teacher selector is used
to determine teacher agents’ familiarity with the environment

 
 
 
 
 
 
and current policy effectiveness for the student agent. Hence,
The student agent have the ﬂexibility to accept the optimal
advice from appropriate teachers for each time point.

In this paper, we propose a more robust and reliable parallel
knowledge-transfer model with high efﬁciency in MARL
framework. We here state the following based settings in our
work:

• All agents simultaneously learn in an environment and
make decisions with interactions with the environment
and other agents.

• There is no optimal expert (good-enough agent) in the

multi-agent team in the initial state.

• (In Parallel) For all agents, their local role of student or
teacher is not ﬁxed. An agent can use knowledge from
other agents as a student and provide its own behavior
knowledge as a teacher for students.

• All agents are learning for their local reward. But agents
in the team are friendly to share knowledge. Our goal is
to maximize the team-wide reward.

Our empirical results across a range of tasks and envi-
ronments demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our knowledge transfer
architecture in multi-agent systems. We show that our attention
selector is capable of teaching the student agent with the most
conﬁdent advice from teacher agents. Compared with other
multi-agent knowledge transfer frameworks, our approach
successfully give rise to an obvious improvement in global
performance and stability.

II. RELATED WORK

As a long-standing topic in the ﬁeld of Reinforcement
Learning, Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [10]
track has a series of works in various ways to improve
the performance and efﬁciency of team coordination. Deep
Reinforcement Learning [11] uses deep neural networks to
approximate the policy and value functions of agents in the
environment
to address the problem of large-scale action-
value space in RL. And Knowledge transfer method has been
studied in several related ﬁelds including imitation learning,
learning from demonstration [4], and inverse reinforcement
learning [12]. Several works [13] extended the source-target
framework in transfer learning on reinforcement learning task.
In the extensive teacher-student framework for transfer from
expert policy to student policy, the student agent takes actions
from the expert agent’s advice. Student-initiated approaches
mainly concern with the students decision value, such as Ask
Uncertain [14] and Ask Important [15]. In teacher-initiated
approaches, teachers decide when to teach based on the com-
parison between students and teachers learning experience,
such as Importance Advising [16], Early Correcting [15],
and Correct Important [16]. Q-teaching [17] designs teaching
rewards to help teachers determine when to advise. Moreover,
episode-sharing mechanism [18] helps agents share individual
successful episodes to accelerate learning.

However, all of the above works require an expert (all-
knowing teacher) as the best agent to guide the learning of
other agents. Zhan et al. [19] analyzed the case of negative

transfer with the existence of a sub-optimal expert and present
some theoretical results.

Recent works provide some solutions for multi-agent paral-

lel advising problem:
AdHocVisit and AdHocTD [20] is an advisor-advisee frame-
work without an expert in the multi-agent environment for
agents learning simultaneously. The learning agents ask for
advice and provide advising policy for other agents. Advisees
use state visit counts to decide when to request advice and
advisors evaluate their advice reliability through conﬁdence
metrics to decide when and what to provide for advisees. For
advice selection, AdHocVisit and AdHocTD follow majority
vote [19].
LeCTR [21] is a new teacher-student framework, which
targets peer-to-peer teaching in order to solve advising-level
problem. Each agent in system learns when and what to advise.
In LeCTR, teacher-student (advising-level) policies are trained
using the multi-agent actor-critic approach (MADDPG) [5].
LeCTR sets the advising-level policies as decentralized actor
and uses a centralized action-value function as critic with
advising-level reward. It
is worth mentioning that LeCTR
considers the communication cost in information exchange.
LeCTR only works in two-player games.

Motivated by attention [22] introduced for information
extraction in deep learning, attention mechanism has recently
emerged in reinforcement learning framework [23], [24]. In
distributed MARL, Jiang & Lu [8] proposed an attentional
communication method with independent actor-critic. Atten-
tion in this work encodes agents’ individual observation before
passing centralized communication channel. With centralized
value estimate, TarMAC [9] is a targeted communication
architecture to generate agents’ internal state representations
as input of centralized critic. Iqbal & Sha [25] introduced an
attention-based critic to select agents in centralized training.
Although attention plays a core role in our idea, our moti-
vation is different from aforementioned approaches. Our algo-
rithm aims to reuse agents’ accumulated knowledge in learning
process but not limited to process individual observation with
agents’ interaction in multi-agent domains. Our approach is
more effective and efﬁcient to maximum team cooperation
utility and ﬂexible to extend in complex environments.

III. PRELIMINARIES

In this work, we consider a decentralized multi-agent re-
inforcement learning scenario, multiple agents in cooperative
team G simultaneously learn a joint task or multiple tasks.
Our settings are formalized as a Decentralized POMDP (Dec-
POMDP) in cooperative multi-agent system. All the agents in
the environment receive local observation oi
t at each time step,
and interact with the environment by executing local action.
Agents then update their policy parameters according to the
feedbacks (reward) given by the environment.

The system is described as (I, S, A, T, R, Ω, O, γ),
• S is a set of states,
• A is a set of joint actions, A = ×iAi,

• T is a set of conditional transition probabilities T (s(cid:48)|s, a)

between states,

• R: S × A → R is the global reward function.
• Ω is a set of joint observations, o = (cid:10)o1, . . . , on(cid:11)
• O is a set of conditional joint observation probability,

P (o|s(cid:48), a) = O (o, s(cid:48), a),

• γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor.
At each time period, the environment is in some state s ∈ S.
Agents take a joint action A ∈ A. Then each agent receives a
local reward ri

(cid:1). The process repeats.

t = Ri (cid:0)st, ai

t

The goal is for all agents to take actions at each time step
that maximize the global expected future discounted reward:
E [(cid:80)∞

t=0 γtrt].

1) Reinforcement Learning:

[1] is a standard frame-
work to achieve the above goal of MDP (or POMDP).
The process of value based reinforcement
learning is to
learn a policy which can maximize agents ﬁnal reward.
Through collecting experience from environment, agent up-
dates its value functionvπ(s) = Eπ [Rt|st = s]and action
value functionQπ(s, a) = Eπ [Rt|st = s, at = a].

2) Deep Q Learning (DQN):

[11] is a value-based Re-
inforcement Learning approach combined with deep neural
networks, which learns the action value function (Q-value) in
continuous environment using value function approximation.
Q-Network updates by minimizing the loss:L(θ) = E[(r +
γ maxa(cid:48) Q(s(cid:48), a(cid:48); θ) − Q(s, a; θ)], and outputs the expected
action value Q(s, a; θ).

3) Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG):

[26] is a policy-
based Reinforcement Learning approach as an extension of
policy gradient (PG) [27], which optimize policy by update
policy parameters θ along the gradient direction,

∇θJ(θ), ∇θJ(θ) = Es∼pπ,a∼πθ [∇θ log πθ(a|s)Qπ(s, a; θ)]

extended

to Deep Deterministic
. Then, DPG is
=
Policy Gradient
Es∼D[.∇θµθ(a|s)∇aQ(s, a; µ)|a=µθ(s)] using deterministic
policy when the variance of action probability distribution
approaches 0.

[28], with ∇θJ(θ)

(DDPG)

4) Attention Mechanism:

inﬂuential
models which can be broadly interpreted as a vector of impor-
tance weights. It has recently been applied in reinforcement
learning domains.

is one of the most

IV. OVERVIEW

Our work targets knowledge reusing between agents in
cooperative MARL, where all the agents in the environment
are not good enough. In this section, we provide a story-level
overview of our main idea. The overview of our motivating
scenario is presented in Fig. 1.

Considering our settings, all the agents act in the environ-
ment and update their self policy parameters with local rewards
from the environment. The actions executed by the agents is
dictated by their self policy parameters. Now, we explore a
novel knowledge transfer framework, PAT. In our framework,

Fig. 1. Overview

each agent has two acting modes, student mode and self-
learning mode. Before each agent takes action, agents’ student
actor-critic modules decide agents’ acting modes with agents’
hidden states. It is not an ad-hoc design for speciﬁc domain.
Agents should learn to ideally learn from other agents.

In self-learning mode, agents take action based on their in-
dependent learned behavioral knowledge, which is represented
as agents’ behavior policy parameters. In this mode, agents’
actions are independent of other agents’ behavioral knowledge.
All agents in self-learning mode are trained in an individual
end-to-end manner using Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
[28] algorithm with an actor network and a critic network.

In student mode, if there are more than two agents in the
system, a student agent receives multiple advice from other
agents. We now refer to a new problem, teacher selecting,
because not all teachers’ knowledge is useful for the student
agent. However, existing frameworks try to dodge this problem
and have key limitation in the scenario where the number of
agents is large, which also causes difﬁcult in model transfer.
We apply a soft attention mechanism in our work to select
teachers’ knowledge. The Attention Teacher Selector solves
the problem by selecting contextual
information in teach-
ers’ learning information and computing weights of teachers’
knowledge. Considering from a different angle, our attentional
module selectively transform the learning information from
teachers with the target of solving student’s problem. The
attentional selecting approach is effective both in multi-task
scenarios and joint task scenarios.

We make a few assumptions on agents’ identities to support
our framework. When an agent chooses student mode in t time
step, other agents in the environment automatically become
its teachers and provide their behavior policy and learning
knowledge to the student agent.

Our parallel setting means that An agent in student mode
can be a teacher of the other agents. When agent i is unfamiliar
with its observation mi
t, but at the same time, agent i may be
familiar with agent j’s observation mi
t because of i’s past
trajectory, which means that agent i can be agent j’s teacher.
At this time step, agent i is in student mode but it also is

a teacher to transfer its knowledge to other agent. The core
idea is agents’ different learning experience. An student agent
may have conﬁdence in the other states and its behavior
knowledge can help the other student agents. Our teacher
selector module is designed to determine the appropriate
teachers and transform teachers’ local behavior knowledge into
student’s advising action. Moreover, our attention mechanism
quantiﬁes the reliability of teachers, so our scenarios do not
need good-enough agents (experts).

In a high-level summary, because of agents’ different learn-
ing experience, agents in a cooperative team are good at
different tasks or different parts of a joint task. Knowledge
Transfer is a framework to help agents solve unfamiliar task
with experienced agents’ learning knowledge.

PAT’s training and architecture details are presented in the

next section.

V. ATTENTION BASED KNOWLEDGE-TRANSFER
ARCHITECTURE

This section introduces our knowledge transfer approach
with more design details of the whole structure and all training
protocols in our framework. In our framework, each agent has
two actor-critic model and an attention mechanism to support
two acting modes.

A. Acting Mode

Different from original

learning, after
receiving observation from the environment, agents in our
framework need to choose their action mode before taking
action.

individual agent

At t time step, agent i reprocesses the observation from
environment with a hidden LSTM (or RNN) unit, which inte-
grates information (observation) from i’s observation history.
The LSTM unit li outputs agent’s observation encoding mi
t,
which represents agent’s hidden state. Here, k is a scaling
variable, which represents the time period covered in the
hidden state. We will adjust k depending on different types
of games.

li : (oi

t−k, ai

t−k, ..., oi

t) → mi
t

(1)

Next, based on this step’s memorized observation, mi
t, agent
i’s student actor network takes this step’s memorized observa-
tion, mi
t, as input and output agent i’s acting mode. Consider-
ing the efﬁciency of information exchange and communication
cost, student actor is used to deciding agent i’ conﬁdence in t
time step. If i has enough conﬁdence with mi
t, student actor
chooses self-learning mode. Conversely, student actor chooses
student mode and sends advice request to other agents.

Student actor and student critic is a deep deterministic
policy gradient model. The student actor network outputs the
probability of choosing student mode. When the probability
exceeds a threshold value, agent will choose student mode
as a deterministic action. The threshold value is a variable
depending on different types of games.

Student actor and student critic represent the acting mode
choosing model which determines whether agent i become a

Fig. 2. PAT Architecture

student and ask teacher agents for advice. We train student
actor-critic using a student reward (cid:101)ri
t.
(cid:1) − V (cid:0)mi
t = V (cid:0)mi
(cid:101)ri

t; θ(cid:48)i
t

t; θi
t

(2)

(cid:1)

θ(cid:48)i
t and θi
t, are agent i policy parameters in student mode
and self-learning mode. The student reward measures gain in
agent learning performance from student mode. The sharing
of student actor-critic network parameters allows this module
learning effectively in environment and easily extending to
other settings.

In our experiments, student actor-critic is trained with the
trained Attention Teacher Selector. Agent i’s student critic is
updated to minimize the student loss function:
(cid:101)R is agent i’s student policy transition set.

(cid:16)

θ ˜Q(cid:17)

L

= E

(cid:20)(cid:16)

(cid:16)

mt, wt|θ ˜Q(cid:17)(cid:17)2(cid:21)

,

˜yt − (cid:101)Q

mt,wt,(cid:101)rt,mt+1∼ (cid:101)R
˜yt = ˜rt + .γ (cid:101)Q(mt+1, w(cid:48)|θ(cid:102)Q(cid:48))|w(cid:48)=(cid:101)µ(cid:48)(mt+1|θw(cid:48))
(3)

Student policy network is updated by ascent with the following
gradient:

(cid:104)

∇θ (cid:101)µJ = E

mt,wt∼ (cid:101)R

mt|θ(cid:101)µ(cid:17)(cid:105)
(4)
Here, (cid:101)µ is agent i’s student policy, which is parameterized

|wt=(cid:101)µ(mt)∇θ (cid:101)µ (cid:101)µ

mt, wt|θ (cid:101)Q(cid:17)

∇w (cid:101)Q

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

by (cid:101)θ

B. Student Mode

1) Attention Teacher Selector: Inspired by the similarity
between source task and target task in transfer learning, we use
attention mechanism to evaluate the task similarity between
student and teachers and teachers’ conﬁdence of student’s
state. Therefore, each agent’s Attention Teacher Selector in
student mode is used to select advice from teachers based
on their similarity and conﬁdence. The main idea behind our
knowledge transfer approach is to learn the student mode by
selectively paying attention to policy advice from other agents
in the cooperative team. Fig. 3 illustrates the main components
of our attention mechanism.

We now describe the Attention Teacher Selector mechanism
in agent student mode. The Attention Teacher Selector (ATS)
is a soft attention mechanism as a differentiable query-key-
value model [23], [29]. After the student actor of student agent
i ∈ G compute the memorized observation at t time step and
choose student mode, ATS receives the encoding hidden state
mi
t. Then, from other agents in the team as teacher agents,
ATS receives the teachers’ encoding learning history hj
t =
lj(oj

t ) and encoding policy parameter θj.

1, aj
Now, ATS computes a query Qi

t = WKhj

t as student query
vector, a key K j
t as teacher key vector, and a
value V j
t = WV θj as teacher policy value vector, where
WK, WQ and WV are attentional learning parameters. After
ATS receives all key-value (K j, V j) from all of teachers
j ∈ G, the attention weight αij is assigned by passing key
vector from teacher and query vector from student into a
softmax:

t = WQmi

1, ..., oj

αij = sof tmax

(cid:19)

(cid:18) QiK j
√
DK

(5)

Here, DK is the dimension of teacher j’s key vector, which
is used to resolve vanishing gradients (Vaswani et al. 2017).
The ﬁnal policy advice is a weight sum with a linear transfor-
mation:

vi = WT

(cid:88)

αijV j

(6)

j(cid:54)=i

Here, WT is a learning parameter for policy parameter decod-
ing.

Behind the single attention head, we use a simple
multi-attention head with a set of
learning parameters
(WK, WQ, WV ) to aggregate all advice from different repre-
sentation subplaces. Besides, attention head dropout is applied
to improve the effectivity of our attention mechanism.

Finally, student agent i obtains its action at this time with

policy parameters from Attention Teacher Selector:
t = vi(mi
(cid:101)ai
t)

(7)

In our experiments, the attention parameters (WK, WQ, WV )
are shared across all agents, because knowledge transfer
process is similar in all pairs of student-teacher, but different
observations introduce different teacher weight vector. This
setting encourages our approach to learn more efﬁcient and
make our model easy to be extended in different settings, such
as larger number of agents or a different environment.

In this work, we consider scenarios where other agents’
learning experience is useful
to a student agent. Feeding
student’s observation information and teacher’s learning ex-
perience into our attention mechanism helps to select action
with other agents’ behavioral policy for the student agent. This
module is an end-to-end knowledge transfer method without
any decentralized learning parameter sharing.

C. Self-learning Mode

If agent i’s student actor chooses self-learning mode, the
t to the actor

student actor sends i’s encoding hidden state mi

Fig. 3. Attention based Knowledge Selection

network. In self-learning mode, agents learn as a common
individual agent. Each agent’s policy in self-learning mode is
independently trained by DDPG [28] algorithm.

Agent is critic network is updated by TD error, R is agent

i’s transition set:

L (cid:0)θQ(cid:1) = Emt,at,rt,mt+1∼R

yt = rt + γQ

(cid:16)

(cid:104)(cid:0)yt − Q (cid:0)mt, at|θQ(cid:1)(cid:1)2(cid:105)
mt+1, a(cid:48)|θQ(cid:48)(cid:17)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)a(cid:48)=µ(cid:48)(mt+1|θµ(cid:48))

,

(8)

The policy gradient of agent is actor network can be derived

as:

∇θµJ = Emt,at∼R

(cid:2)∇aQ (cid:0)mt, at|θQ(cid:1) |at=µ(mt)∇θµµ (mt|θµ)(cid:3) .

(9)
In games with discrete action space, in self-learning mode,
we refer to the modiﬁed discrete version of DDPG suggested
by [5] in agents’ actor-critic networks. Agents in self-learning
update its actor network use,

∇θµ J = Emt,at∼R [∇aQ(mt, at)∇θµat]

(10)

.

Our framework is adapted for both continuous action space

and discrete action space.

VI. EMPIRICAL EVALUATIONS

We construct

the team-wide
three environments to test
performance of PAT and existing advising methods in multi-
tasks and joint task scenarios. Also, we compare the scalability
of all the approaches with the increase of number of agents.
Additionally, the transferability of PAT is evaluated in different
environments.

A. Setup

Empirical evaluations are performed on three cooperative
multi-agent environments: Grid Treasure Collection, Moving
Treasure Collection, Predator-Prey, and. We implement Grid
Treasure Collection, a standard grid world environment. Mov-
ing Treasure Collection and Predator-Prey are implemented

Fig. 4. Grid Treasure Collection, 4 agents, 2 treasure and 2 treasure banks

based on Multi-Agent Particle Environment [5], [30] where
agents move around in a 2D space and involve interaction
between agents. We brieﬂy describe the three environments
below:

1) Grid Treasure Collection: : There are M agents and M/2
treasure grids and M/2 treasure banks in the grid maze (shown
in Fig. 4). Each treasure is corresponding to a treasure bank.
When agents collect treasures in treasure grids, agents get
small rewards, and then return treasures to its corresponding
bank, agents receives big rewards. Each treasure grid has M
treasures and agents can only obtain one treasure from each
treasure grid. The ability of agents to carry treasures is not
limited. But when agents return wrong treasures to treasure
banks, agents receive big penalties.

2) Moving Treasure Collection: : The game rule in Moving
Treasure Collection is similar to the above game, but in this
environment, agents are green and treasures and treasure banks
are moving randomly. And all objects are moving in a 2D open
ground. Obstacles (large black circles) block the way in the
environment.

3) Cooperative Navigation: : There are M agents (green)
and M landmarks (purple) in this environment. Agents are
rewarded based on how far any agent is from each landmark.
Agents are required to position themselves covering all the
landmarks. When an agent covers a landmark, it gets a local
reward. Obstacles (large black circles) block the way.

To simplify our approach training, we set discrete action
spaces in all the environments, allowing agents to move up,
down, left, right, or stay. All agents receive partial observation
at each step, and get local feedback from environments. We
plan to evaluate our approach in both multi-task environment
(Treasure Collection) and joint task environment

B. Baselines

We compare our approach, PAT with implementation of
fully decentralized training approaches including Individual
Deep Q-Learning (IQN) [11], AdHocTD [20] and LeCTR
[21]. IQN, as a distributed baseline, is a reinforcement learning
algorithm for single agent, which is trained independently
for each agent with partial observation in our environments.

Fig. 5. Average reward per episode in Grid Treasure Collection

AdHocTD, LeCTR and our method rely on action advising
without any other information communication , which means
each agent is unaware of the observations and rewards of
other agents in the environment. We implement AdHocTD
and LeCTR with original experimental parameters and public
implementations. In LeCTR implementation, we use Majority
Vote for multiple advice selecting. Hyperparameters are tuned
based on our environments and performance. All implemen-
tation details will be released with code.

We evaluate all the models on two different agent teams ,
with M=4, M=8 and M=12 agents. When the number of agents
increasing, the amount of calculation and difﬁculty increase
rapidly.. Average step length per episode (Treasure Collection
games’ max episode length = 1000), success rate of covering
all landmarks in Cooperative Navigation, and average sum
of rewards per episode are three indicators used to evaluate
performance of all models. All results are reported using 30
independent training setting different seeds. Table I shows the
results in 4-agent and 12-agent environments for comparison.
(The results in 8-agent environment will be presented in later
released data)

C. Results and Analysis

Fig. 5 displays average team rewards per episode in Grid
Treasure Collection. A thorough evaluation result is summa-
rized in Table I.

In 4-agent Grid Treasure Collection (GTC) and Mov-
ing Treasure Collection (MTC) game, PAT outperforms all
models with a higher average reward after convergence.
In Comparison of all approachs in average episode length
(Ave step), PAT has no obvious advantage compared with
LeCTR, but PAT greatly improves average team reward per
episode (Avg reward). Attention mechanism performs well
and signiﬁcantly ﬁghts out agents with useful experience (have
successfully collected treasures), which can correctly guide
unfamiliar agents to take more beneﬁcial actions. AdHocTD
selects teachers using the number of times the agent visited
the current state. As a result, the phenomenon of over-advising
appears in AdHocTD after trained over 2000 episodes, which
means that students may take advice from teachers with
more bad experience. It contributes to AdHocTD worse ﬁnal

TABLE I
EVALUATION RESULTS

TASK

APPROACH

Grid Treasure Collection
Grid Treasure Collection
Grid Treasure Collection
Grid Treasure Collection

Moving Treasure Collection
Moving Treasure Collection
Moving Treasure Collection
Moving Treasure Collection

Cooperative Navigation
Cooperative Navigation
Cooperative Navigation
Cooperative Navigation

Baseline
AdHocTD
LeCTR
PAT

Baseline
AdHocTD
LeCTR
PAT

Baseline
AdHocTD
LeCTR
PAT

M=4
Avg step
1000 ± 0
876 ± 15
812 ± 39
762 ± 20

1000 ± 0
1000 ± 0
877 ± 46
854 ± 23

397 ± 25
320 ± 28
278 ± 25
289 ± 18

Success %

Avg reward

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

0.78 ± 1.43
18.76 ± 1.14
29.87 ± 1.23
45.65 ± 2.32

−1.84 ± 0.66
8.22 ± 1.79
20.76 ± 0.24
33.98 ± 2.13

52.2 ± 2.0 −1.78 ± 0.03
69.0 ± 3.7 −1.23 ± 0.27
81.4 ± 3.2 −1.29 ± 0.39
80.2 ± 3.2 −0.45 ± 0.07

M=12
Avg step
2000 ± 0
1821 ± 29
1836 ± 23
1157 ± 37

2000 ± 0
1987 ± 67
1889 ± 48
1239 ± 32

782 ± 4
547 ± 29
672 ± 14
498 ± 10

Success %

Avg reward

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

−1.20 ± 0.04
12.56 ± 0.34
11.68 ± 2.24
20.34 ± 1.49

−3.59 ± 0.26
−3.34 ± 0.21
−2.79 ± 2.12
−0.32 ± 0.43

32.7 ± 4.7 −4.68 ± 0.05
42.6 ± 2.0 −3.50 ± 0.08
40.7 ± 1.9 −3.36 ± 0.70
59.2 ± 1.3 −2.67 ± 0.02

reward performance than LeCTR and PAT. LeCTR learns how
to teach by centralized training and decentralized executing,
causing the learning instability in early episodes. Observing
the results, PAT successfully avoids this problem by training
a decentralized student actor-critic network for the decision of
acting mode.

In 4-agent Cooperative Navigation, PAT surprisingly per-
forms longer episode length and lower success rate than
LeCTR. Attention mechanism in PAT tends to imitate suc-
cessful action from other agents, which helps student agent
gain more local rewards. But it might cause a bad impact on
team coordination in a joint task. For example, agents tend to
cover the same landmarks with successful experience, but the
team needs to cover all the landmarks. PAT is hard to learn the
team cooperative policy and gain more cooperative rewards.
However, LeCTR uses a centralized critic network to calculate
advising value concatenating all agents’ observation, which
exactly improves cooperation performance between agents.
This result gives us a future direction that we should try to
modify attention tendency in global reward for cooperative
tasks.

1) Scalability: When the number of agents is 12 in all the
environments, because of the increasing computation difﬁculty
in selecting advice from a larger agent team, AdHocTD’s
advising probabilistic mechanism can not handle the prob-
lem in more information selecting, resulting in sub-optimal
rewards. LeCTR, as an algorithm originally supporting two-
player games, has low performance in a larger size of agent
team. We suspect it due to LeCTR’s centralized control of
advising. With more agents in the environments, LeCTR’s
centralized advising-level critic performs poorly with limited
training time. As expected, PAT’s attention selector effectively
ﬁltering knowledge from more teachers and maintain student
mode’s accuracy, so our approach has a larger advantage with
the increase in number of agents. Our experimental results
conﬁrm our inference.

In summary, PAT performs much better than all approaches
and has a distinct advantage in average team-wide rewards in

complex multi-task environments as expected. We also report
PAT’s disadvantage in the joint-task scenario. PAT scales better
when agents are added in all the experiments, which shows that
sharing attention mechanism is useful for information selecting
in a large multi-agent team.

2) Transferablility: Analysing the above results, the behav-
ior knowledge transfer becomes more difﬁcult when number of
agents increases. We design a new experiment to explore our
model parameters transfer performance. We test our approach
in two experiments with different numbers of agents. First,
agents are trained in an environment with a small number
of agents. Then,
the trained parameters of agents’ shared
attention mechanisms are transferred/reused in an environment
with more agents. We compared our transfer experimental
performance with original training performance data of larger
agent teams.

Table II shows the transfer performance of 4-agent attention
mechanism in 8-agent environment, and Table III presents
the comparison between original learning performance and 6-
agent model transfer data in 12-agent environment. In transfer
experiments, the team of 8 or 12 agents trains their new indi-
vidual student actor-critic network and self-learning network
based on the transferred attention mechanism trained by a
smaller team.

According to the compared results summarized in Table
II and III, our approach can be efﬁciently transferred. The
transferred model successfully achieve nearly 90% of the
original training performance, which also better than all other
approaches with fully training. It can save large computational
costs for large-size team of agents.
. Our shared attention
selector can effectively solve new tasks based on related
experience.

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We introduce a parallel knowledge-transfer framework, PAT
for decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning. Our key
idea is designing two acting mode for agents and using a
shared attention mechanism to select behavior knowledge

TABLE II
TRANSFER EVALUATIONS IN M=8

Task
M=8

Original
Avg step

Avg reward

Grid
Moving

914 ± 65
1174 ± 42

27.80 ± 3.49
10.79 ± 3.58

M=4
Transfer
Avg step
1021 ± 18
997 ± 10

24.86 ± 2.45
9.37 ± 3.02

[13] F. L. Da Silva and A. H. R. Costa, “A survey on transfer learning
for multiagent reinforcement learning systems,” Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, vol. 64, pp. 645–703, 2019.

[14] J. A. Clouse, “On integrating apprentice learning and reinforcement

Avg reward

learning.” 1997.

[15] O. Amir, E. Kamar, A. Kolobov, and B. Grosz, “Interactive teaching

strategies for agent training,” 2016.

[16] L. Torrey and M. Taylor, “Teaching on a budget: Agents advising agents
in reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 2013 international con-
ference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems.
International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2013, pp.
1053–1060.

[17] A. Fachantidis, M. Taylor, and I. Vlahavas, “Learning to teach reinforce-
ment learning agents,” Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 21–42, 2018.

[18] M. Tan, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooper-
ative agents,” in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on
machine learning, 1993, pp. 330–337.

[19] Y. Zhan, H. B. Ammar et al., “Theoretically-grounded policy advice
from multiple teachers in reinforcement learning settings with applica-
tions to negative transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03986, 2016.
[20] F. L. Da Silva, R. Glatt, and A. H. R. Costa, “Simultaneously learning
and advising in multiagent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of
the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems.
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Sys-
tems, 2017, pp. 1100–1108.

[21] S. Omidshaﬁei, D.-K. Kim, M. Liu, G. Tesauro, M. Riemer, C. Amato,
M. Campbell, and J. P. How, “Learning to teach in cooperative multi-
agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33, 2019, pp. 6128–6136.

[22] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[23] J. Oh, V. Chockalingam, S. Singh, and H. Lee, “Control of mem-
ory, active perception, and action in minecraft,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.09128, 2016.

[24] J. Choi, B.-J. Lee, and B.-T. Zhang, “Multi-focus attention network for
efﬁcient deep reinforcement learning,” in Workshops at the Thirty-First
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017.

[25] S. Iqbal and F. Sha, “Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement

learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02912, 2018.

[26] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller,

“Deterministic policy gradient algorithms,” 2014.

[27] R. S. Sutton, D. A. McAllester, S. P. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy
gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approxima-
tion,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2000, pp.
1057–1063.

[28] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.

[29] A. Graves, G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka, “Neural turing machines,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.

[30] I. Mordatch and P. Abbeel, “Emergence of grounded compositional
language in multi-agent populations,” in Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.

TABLE III
TRANSFER EVALUATIONS IN M=12

Task
M=12

Original
Avg step

Avg reward

Grid
Moving

1157 ± 37
20.34 ± 1.49
1239 ± 32 −0.32 ± 0.43

M=8
Transfer
Avg step
1230 ± 9
1389 ± 24

Avg reward

18.85 ± 0.98
3.06 ± 0.09

from other agents to accelerate student agent learning. We
empirically evaluate our proposed approach against all state-
of-the-art advising or teaching methods in multi-agent environ-
ments. Results in experiments of scaling the number of agents
and model
transfer are also shown. Extending knowledge
transfer in joint task learning and more complicated multi-
agent systems is our future research direction.

REFERENCES

[1] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore, “Reinforcement
learning: A survey,” Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, vol. 4,
pp. 237–285, 1996.

[2] M. E. Taylor and P. Stone, “Transfer learning for reinforcement learning
domains: A survey,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 10, no.
Jul, pp. 1633–1685, 2009.

[3] L. Matignon, L. Jeanpierre, and A.-I. Mouaddib, “Coordinated multi-
robot exploration under communication constraints using decentralized
markov decision processes,” in Twenty-sixth AAAI conference on artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, 2012.

[4] H. M. Le, Y. Yue, P. Carr, and P. Lucey, “Coordinated multi-agent
imitation learning,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning-Volume 70.
JMLR. org, 2017, pp. 1995–2003.
[5] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017,
pp. 6379–6390.

[6] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus et al., “Learning multiagent communication
with backpropagation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2016, pp. 2244–2252.

[7] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson, “Learning
to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 2137–
2145.

[8] J. Jiang and Z. Lu, “Learning attentional communication for multi-agent
cooperation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2018, pp. 7254–7264.

[9] A. Das, T. Gervet, J. Romoff, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rabbat,
and J. Pineau, “Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.11187, 2018.

[10] L. Bus¸oniu, R. Babuˇska, and B. De Schutter, “Multi-agent reinforcement
learning: An overview,” in Innovations in multi-agent systems and
applications-1. Springer, 2010, pp. 183–221.

[11] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al., “Human-level control
learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, p. 529, 2015.

through deep reinforcement

[12] D. Hadﬁeld-Menell, S. J. Russell, P. Abbeel, and A. Dragan, “Coopera-
tive inverse reinforcement learning,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2016, pp. 3909–3917.

