3
2
0
2

b
e
F
7

]

O
A
.
n
i
l
n
[

1
v
3
5
2
3
0
.
2
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collective traﬃc of agents that remember∗

Danny Raj M† and Arvind Nayak
Dept of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore, Bengaluru 560012, Karnataka, India
(Dated: February 8, 2023)

Traﬃc and pedestrian systems consist of human collectives where agents are intelligent and capable of
processing available information, to perform tactical manoeuvres that can potentially increase their movement
eﬃciency. In this study, we introduce a social force model for agents that possess memory. Information of the
agent’s past aﬀects the agent’s instantaneous movement in order to swiftly take the agent towards its desired
state. We show how the presence of memory is akin to an agent performing a proportional–integral control to
achieve its desired state. The longer the agent remembers and the more impact the memory has on its motion,
better is the movement of an isolated agent in terms of achieving its desired state. However, when in a collective,
the interactions between the agents lead to non-monotonic eﬀect of memory on the traﬃc dynamics. A group
of agents with memory exiting through a narrow door exhibit more clogging with memory than without it. We
also show that a very large amount of memory results in variation in the memory force experienced by agents in
the system at any time, which reduces the propensity to form clogs and leads to eﬃcient movement.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ability to think is a key distinction between agents in hu-
man collectives, like vehicular and pedestrian traﬃc ﬂows [1–
4], and granular collectives [5, 6], which are made up of grains
that respond and move only to external forcing. Therefore,
when one writes down a set of governing equations either in
the form of rules of interaction or social forces, it is impor-
tant to specify those that distinguish a living agent from one
that is non-living. It would be an interesting problem to ex-
plore how this distinction manifests in the dynamics of the
collective. Since a comprehensive model for human cogni-
tion (or thinking) is incredibly hard to formulate, we adopt a
bottom-up approach where we investigate how a certain facet
of intelligence aﬀects the collective dynamics.

One of the key characteristics of a living agent is its ability
to assimilate information, process it and alter the agent’s deci-
sions based on it. A critical aspect in this process is the agent’s
memory. An agent can remember its past actions and change
its current actions accordingly to achieve better performance.
Memory of an agent can aﬀect the dynamics across several
time scales: from learning route-speciﬁc rules over several
days and months, to remembering its recent trajectory and re-
acting to immediate changes in the environment/jams. Here,
we concentrate on the latter. We develop a social force model
for the memory of an agent based on its past movement. Re-
membering how it moved in the recent past, the agent evaluates
how well it has achieved its desired velocity and takes a tactical
decision—to make up for the sub-optimal past movement.

In this article, we introduce a social force model for agents
that exhibit memory. Memory is characterised by two pa-
rameters: i) how long the agent remembers and, ii) impact of
memory on the movement. We ﬁrst analyse the model equa-
tions to understand the impact of memory on the dynamics of
an isolated agent. Then, we proceed to test the eﬀect of mem-
ory on the collective. We simulate agents attempting to exit

via narrow door where agents are known to exhibit clogging
behaviour near the exits. Our objective is to understand how
memory aids in the collective motion: Does the presence of
memory always guarantee eﬃcient movement? How does it
impact the propensity to form or displace agents in a clog?

II. MODEL FOR TRAFFIC DYNAMICS

A. Agents with memory

The motion of agents is modelled using a social force model,
similar to Helbing et al [7–9]. The velocity of an agent evolves
in time based on Eq 1, where: i) the ﬁrst term in the RHS is the
restitution force that restores the agent to its desired direction
and speed v0, ii) the second term is the force due to the eﬀect
of the memory of an agent and, iii) the third term I𝑖
𝑗,𝑏 is the
net social interaction of the agent to avoid collision with other
agents and the boundary.

𝑚

𝑑v𝑖
𝑑𝑡

=

𝑚
𝜏

(v0 − v𝑖) + ˜𝛽M𝑖 + 𝐼𝑖

𝑗,𝑏

(1)

Here, the memory M𝑖 (𝑡) of an agent 𝑖 at time 𝑡, is deﬁned as
the total deviation of the velocity of the agent from its desired
velocity v0 in the time window [𝑡 − 𝑇, 𝑡] of the agent’s recent
past (see Eq 2).

M𝑖 =

∫ 𝑡

𝑡−𝑇

(cid:0)v0 − v𝑖 (𝑡 (cid:48))(cid:1) 𝑑𝑡 (cid:48)

(2)

When the agent is unable to travel at its desired speed and
direction, the memory term takes a positive value and oﬀers
an additional force to help restore the agent’s motion sooner.

𝐼 𝑖
𝑗,𝑏 =

∑︁

(cid:104)

𝑖, 𝑗 + F𝑡
F𝑛
𝑖, 𝑗

(cid:105)

+ F𝑛

𝑏 + F𝑡
𝑏

(3)

∀ 𝑗 ∈N𝑖

∗ Presented at the Traﬃc and Granular Flow 22 conference, held in New

Delhi, India.

† dannym@iisc.ac.in; dannyrajmasila@gmail.com

The term I𝑖

𝑗,𝑏 can take diﬀerent forms depending on the
context of the traﬃc problem. For pedestrian dynamics [8],

 
 
 
 
 
 
Helbing and co-workers considered interaction forces similar
to that used in granular ﬂows: a sum of the total normal and
tangential (frictional) forces due to contact. However, I𝑖
𝑗,𝑏 can
also include small-ranged forces that prevent collisions [9],
which are more suitable for traﬃc ﬂow problems. The qual-
itative results shown in the paper do not depend on the exact
choice of the models for interactions.

B. Connections to control theory.

If one were to imagine v0 as the set-point for a given agent,
i.e., the desired state that the agent wants to achieve, then the
restitution force and the memory term in Eqs 1 and 2, exactly
resemble a proportional and an integral parts of a controller
(PI), respectively. Presence of an integral component can
result in overshoots and oscillations before the agent reaches
its set-point. In the absence of memory and when there are
continuous collisions with obstacles as agents move, we can
expect the dynamics of the agent to show an oﬀset (not reach
(cid:107)v0(cid:107))—since, it is well known that a proportional controller
cannot take the system exactly to its set-point. Addition of
memory could guarantee reaching the set-point, even in the
presence of obstacles.

One could also conceive a dynamics resembling a PID con-
troller. This modiﬁcation does not qualitatively change the
dynamics of the system. Since, adding a derivative term for
the deviation v0 − v𝑖, gets absorbed into the inertia (LHS term
of Eq 1). In other words, the derivative term acts like an ef-
fective mass term that slows the response of the agent to any
social force.

C. Memory as a state of the agent.

The memory term in Eq 2 is computed within a time window
of [𝑡 −𝑇, 𝑡]. Any information from outside the time window is
not used and all the information within are equally weighted.
A simpler and more elegant formulation can be arrived at, if
we weight the information with an exponential weighting as
shown in Eq 4.

M𝑖 =

∫ 𝑡

0

𝑒 𝑡(cid:48)−𝑡

˜𝛼 (cid:0)v0 − v𝑖 (𝑡 (cid:48))(cid:1) 𝑑𝑡 (cid:48)

(4)

An exponential weighting prioritises information close to the
current time instant than from a distant past. This allows us
to move away from a discontinuous time window set by 𝑇
and towards a time scale ˜𝛼. Then, we can diﬀerentiate Eq 4
with time, using the Leibniz rule for diﬀerentiating under the
integral sign to get Eq 5.
𝑑M𝑖
𝑑𝑡

= v0 − v𝑖 −

(5)

M𝑖
˜𝛼

This allows us to convert the memory term, which was previ-
ously an integral, into a dynamic state of the agent. Eq 5 de-
scribes the evolution of this memory-state of the agent: v0 − v𝑖
serves as the instantaneous source for the memory while − M𝑖
˜𝛼
is the rate at which memory decays.

2

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Dynamics of a single agent

The equations for the dynamics of an isolated agent, far away
from the boundary, can be written compactly as in Eq 6. This
is after: i) the governing equations in Eq 1 are scaled (𝑡 with
𝜏, (cid:107)v(cid:107) with (cid:107)v0(cid:107), (cid:107)M(cid:107) with (cid:107)v0 (cid:107)/𝜏), ii) the interaction terms
are dropped and, iii) the scaled memory parameters become
𝛼 = ˜𝛼/𝜏 and 𝛽 = ˜𝛽/𝑚.

𝑑
𝑑𝑡

𝑣 𝑥
𝑣 𝑦
𝑀𝑥
𝑀𝑦

(cid:169)
(cid:173)
(cid:173)
(cid:173)
(cid:171)

(cid:170)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:172)

=

𝛽
−1 0
0
𝛽
(cid:169)
0 −1
0
(cid:173)
−1 0 − 1
(cid:173)
0
𝛼
(cid:173)
0 − 1
0 −1
𝛼
(cid:171)

(cid:170)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:172)

×

𝑣 𝑥
𝑣 𝑦
𝑀𝑥
𝑀𝑦

(cid:169)
(cid:173)
(cid:173)
(cid:173)
(cid:171)

(cid:170)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:174)
(cid:172)

+

1
(cid:169)
(cid:170)
0
(cid:173)
(cid:174)
(cid:173)
(cid:174)
1
(cid:173)
(cid:174)
0
(cid:171)
(cid:172)

(6)

To understand the eﬀect of memory (𝛼 and 𝛽) on the move-
ment characteristics of a single agent, it is enough to look at
the eigen values of the matrix in Eq 6. The eigen values are
2𝛼 × (cid:2) − (𝛼 + 1) ± √︁−4𝛼2 𝛽 + 𝛼2 − 2𝛼 + 1 (cid:3), repeated twice.
1
Analysing the eigen values helps us partition the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space
into four regions (see Fig 1, i).

Stability: When 𝛽 > 0, the memory term aids in restoring
the agent to its desired state at steady state (see Fig 1, ii). And
when 𝛽 < 0, memory opposes the agent’s attempt to reach its
desired state. However, since the restitution force (v0 − v𝑖)
always acts to restore the agent’s dynamics, a small negative
𝛽 memory does not immediately destabilise the dynamics and
only increases the time taken to reach steady state (see Fig 1,
vi). However, when 𝛽 < − 1
𝛼 , the eigen values begin to have a
positive real part and the memory term overpowers the resti-
tution force leading to unstable dynamics (see Fig 1, vii).
2𝛼 + 1

4𝛼2 , the
eigen values become complex conjugates and the dynamics
become under-damped which results in oscillations in both the
memory and the velocity of the agent (Fig 1, iv and v). Also,
when 𝛼 = 1, any 𝛽 greater than 0 results in oscillations. This
divides the region exhibiting non-oscillatory dynamics into
two. The high-𝛼 part of this region exhibits dynamics where
we observe overshoots; i.e.
the velocity takes a larger value
before asymptotically tapering to the desired, steady state value
(see Fig 1, ii and iii to compare the dynamics in the low-𝛼 and
high-𝛼 regions).

Overshoots & oscillations: When 𝛽 > 1

4 − 1

B. Collective escape through a narrow exit

To understand the eﬀect of memory on the dynamics of the
collective, we consider a well known system: agents exiting a
room via a narrow door (See inset of ﬁgure 2 i). We use the
conditions similar to that in ref [8]. The governing equations in
Eq 1 and 5 are simulated where every agent has a v0, directed
along the line joining the agent centre and the mid-point of the
exit of the door. The inter-agent interactions lead to collisions
between agents as they crowd near the exit, slowing them down
and giving rise to temporary clogging. Now as agents slow
down, memory force increases since the source for the memory

3

FIG. 1. (i) Regions with qualitatively diﬀerent dynamics in the 𝛽 − 𝛼 parameter space. Coloured (shaded) regions exhibit stable dynamics,
which can be oscillatory, non-oscillatory and opposing (negative 𝛽). The unshaded region marks the unstable region, which is found only
when 𝛽 takes a suﬃciently large negative value. (ii)-(vii) Time evolution of the x components of velocity and memory of the isolated agent
for diﬀerent memory parameters. (ii) 𝛼 = 0.3; 𝛽 = 2, (iii) 𝛼 = 3; 𝛽 = 0.2, (iv) 𝛼 = 0.75; 𝛽 = 3, (v) 𝛼 = 3; 𝛽 = 3, (vi) 𝛼 = 0.4; 𝛽 = −1, (vii)
𝛼 = 3; 𝛽 = −1.

is v0 − v𝑖. This makes the agents push harder as they attempt
to exit the room. To understand how these forces experienced
by the agents lead to the collective escape of these agents, we
introduce an order parameter C that characterises the clogging
propensity. Here, C is simply the fraction of the total time
when the agent-number in the room remains a constant. With
this deﬁnition, a high value of C would correspond to the
prevalence of a large number of clogging events during which
agent number in the room remains unchanged.

Figure 2 i, shows the heat map of C in the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space.
We ﬁnd the landscape of C to be non-monotonic with respect
i.e., an increase in the memory
to both the principle axes:
does not necessarily reduce the propensity to form clogs. This
observation is similar to the so-called faster-is-slower eﬀect
(FIS), reported by Helbing et al [8, 10, 11], where agents
trying harder do not necessarily lead to more eﬃcient escape.
In addition, we ﬁnd that the observed non-monotonic eﬀect
is more pronounced in certain regions of the 𝛼 − 𝛽 space.
For instance, when either 𝛼 or 𝛽 are high (see ﬁgure 2 i),
the non-monotonicity with respect to the other parameter is
well pronounced in comparison to when they are low. We
believe this feature arises due to the intrinsic dependence of
the memory force on the parameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 as seen in ﬁgure 1.
When an agent remembers only its recent past, i.e. when 𝛼
is small, a high value of 𝛽 is required to produce a force
of a similar magnitude to transition from non-oscillatory to
oscillatory behaviour and vice versa.

We partition the 𝛼 − 𝛽 space in ﬁgure 2 i into four regions
while preserving the 𝛼 − 𝛽 relationship discussed previously.
Region I is monotonic with respect to C and completely covers
and extends over the region in the 𝛼 − 𝛽 space corresponding
to non-oscillatory behaviour at the agent-level (compare with
ﬁgure 1). Region II corresponds to the ideal amount of mem-
ory that agents can possess to eﬃciently escape through the
exit. Region III corresponds to the FIS phenomenon and it is
sandwiched between regions II and IV which exhibit eﬃcient
collective escape.

To understand how memory aﬀects the escape dynamics

and the formation of clogs, we look at the averaged dynamics
of the memory term for the agents within the room. Figure 2
ii shows the time evolution of the mean and standard devia-
tion of the memory (cid:107) 𝑀𝑖 (𝑡)(cid:107) in system, averaged over all the
independent realisations of the escape dynamics. The initial
transient dynamics show that the eﬀect of memory is more pro-
nounced for the agents with lesser strength of memory (i.e.,
regions 𝐼 𝐼 > 𝐼 𝐼 𝐼 > 𝐼𝑉). This is because memory increases
when the agents begin to slow down and agents with a higher
strength of memory reach their desired state faster. This trend
disappears as the agents clog near the entrance: both the mean
and standard deviation of memory of the agents within the
room increases rapidly in time. The dynamics of agents with
memory in region III begin to have a higher overall memory
with smaller variation between the agents within the room in
comparison to II and IV. In other words, the strength and time
scale of memory is such that all the agents try hard to exit by a
similar amount which favours the formation of clogs and gives
rise to a high value of C. However, the higher variation and
the lower mean memory of agents with memory in region IV
implies that the some agents have more memory than the rest,
which favours a more eﬃcient exit strategy giving rise to lower
values for C.

IV. CONCLUSION

A key feature of the traﬃc characteristics of living collec-
tives is the ability of individual agents to assimilate dynamic
In this
information and alter their movement appropriately.
article, we introduce memory, a facet of intelligence where an
agent remembers its trajectory from its recent past and quan-
tiﬁes how well it was able to achieve its desired velocity. The
agent makes up for any non-optimal movement in its recent
past with a social force proportional to the memory. We show
that an agent’s memory has an eﬀect akin to a Proportional–
Integral controller. Depending on the memory parameters 𝛼
and 𝛽, the agent dynamics can be stable or unstable, and give

OscillatoryNon-oscillatoryStable & opposingUnstable𝛽=−1𝛼𝛽=14−12𝛼+14𝑎!Time𝑣!,𝑀!Opposing (stable)Opposing (unstable)(i)(ii)(iii)(iv)(v)(vi)(vii)Non-oscillatoryOscillatoryTime scale of memory 𝛼Time scale of memory 𝛽4

FIG. 2. (i) - Heat map of the clogging order parameter C, averaged over 75 independent realisations, plotted for the memory parameters
𝛽 ∈ [0, 10] and 𝛼 ∈ [0.1, 30].
(ii) - Time evolution of the mean
INSET: a snapshot of agents exiting a room through a narrow exit.
and the standard deviation of the memory of agents within the room, averaged over 75 independent realisations. This is plotted for three
diﬀerent memory conﬁgurations one from each of the regions II, III and IV. Parameters considered are 𝛼 = 22.2 and 𝛽 = 0.3 for region II,
𝛼 = 22.2 and 𝛽 = 2 for region III and 𝛼 = 22.2 and 𝛽 = 10 for region IV.

rise to overshoots and oscillations. The eigen values of the
system shed light on the boundaries that partition the diﬀerent
regions in the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space that show qualitatively diﬀerent
dynamics.

While the eﬀect of memory on the dynamics of the agent
is monotonic when only a single agent is considered, it is not
the case when agents are in a crowd. We study the eﬀect of
memory on the dynamics of agents exiting a room through
a narrow door. We ﬁnd that the presence of memory does
not always improve the movement of the agents: the clogging
order parameter C has a non-monotonic landscape in the 𝛽 − 𝛼
space resulting in a behaviour similar to the well known faster-
is-slower eﬀect. This allows us to partition the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space
into four regions based on a order parameter that quantiﬁes
clogging propensity. We ﬁnd the eigen values corresponding
to the motion of individual agents, in the non-monotonic region

of the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space, to be complex. In other words, the observed
FIS eﬀect is a result of the under-damped response of agents
arising due to the integral component of the memory force
term. The time dynamics of the mean and standard deviation
of the memory of agents within the room, reveal why some
regions in the 𝛽 − 𝛼 space favour the formation of clogs giving
rise to non-monotonicity.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank the DST INSPIRE faculty award (grant
number: DST/INSPIRE/04 /2017/002985) for the funding.
DRM thanks V Kumaran, IISc Bangalore for the discussions
during the early stages of the work.

[1] M. Moussaid, S. Garnier, G. Theraulaz, and D. Helbing, Collec-
tive Information Processing and Pattern Formation in Swarms,
Flocks, and Crowds, Topics in Cognitive Science 1, 469 (2009).
[2] M. J. Seitz, N. W. Bode, and G. Köster, How cognitive heuristics
can explain social interactions in spatial movement, Journal of
the Royal Society Interface 13, 10.1098/rsif.2016.0439 (2016).
[3] Y. Rahmati and A. Talebpour, Learning-based game theoretical
framework for modeling pedestrian motion, Physical Review E
98, 032312 (2018).

[4] A. Nicolas, M. Kuperman, S. Ibañez, S. Bouzat, and C. Appert-
Rolland, Mechanical response of dense pedestrian crowds to the
crossing of intruders, Scientiﬁc Reports 9, 105 (2019).

[5] R. Candelier and O. Dauchot, Journey of an intruder through the
ﬂuidization and jamming transitions of a dense granular media,
Physical Review E 81, 011304 (2010).

[6] Y. Guo and J. S. Curtis, Discrete element method simulations
for complex granular ﬂows, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics

47, 21 (2015).

[7] D. Helbing and P. Molnár, Social force model for pedestrian

dynamics, Physical Review E 51, 4282 (1995).

[8] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, Simulating dynamical

features of escape panic, Nature 407, 487 (2000).

[9] D. Helbing, I. J. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, Freezing by Heating in
a Driven Mesoscopic System, Physical Review Letters 84, 1240
(2000).

[10] A. Garcimartín, I. Zuriguel, J. M. Pastor, C. Martín-Gómez,
and D. R. Parisi, Experimental evidence of the "faster is slower"
eﬀect, Transportation Research Procedia 2, 760 (2014).
[11] J. M. Pastor, A. Garcimartín, P. a. Gago, J. P. Peralta, C. Martín-
Gómez, L. M. Ferrer, D. Maza, D. R. Parisi, L. a. Pugnaloni, and
I. Zuriguel, Experimental proof of faster-is-slower in systems
of frictional particles ﬂowing through constrictions, Physical
Review E 92, 062817 (2015).

IIIIIIIV8Time scale of memory 𝛼Time scale of memory 𝛽(i)(ii)