A Study in a Hybrid Centralised-Swarm Agent Community 

Bradley van Aardt, Tshilidzi Marwala 

School of Electrical and Information Engineering 
University of Witwatersrand 
Johannesburg, South Africa. 

b.vanaardt@ee.wits.ac.za t.marwala@ee.wits.ac.za  

Abstract 
This  paper  describes  a  systems  architecture  for  a 
hybrid  Centralised/Swarm  based  multi-agent  system. 
The  issue  of  local  goal  assignment  for  agents  is 
investigated  through  the  use  of  a  global  agent  which 
teaches  the  agents  responses  to  given  situations.  We 
implement  a  test  problem  in  the  form  of  a  Pursuit 
game, where the Multi-Agent system is a set of captor 
agents.  The  agents  learn  solutions  to  certain  board 
positions  from  the  global  agent  if  they  are  unable  to 
find  a  solution.  The  captor  agents  learn  through  the 
use  of  multi-layer  perceptron  neural  networks.  The 
global  agent  is  able  to  solve  board  positions  through 
the  use  of  a  Genetic  Algorithm.  The  cooperation 
between  agents  and  the  results  of  the  simulation  are 
discussed here.  

1.  Introduction 

Multi-agent systems are an engineering paradigm that 
has been gaining momentum over the past years [11]. 
A  particular  form  of  Multi-Agent  systems,  Swarm 
based  systems  have  been  successfully  applied  to  a 
number of problems [2]  

A large part of the difficulty in designing such systems 
is  assigning  Local  strategies  to  individual  agents  in  a 
community, with the result of some desired overall or 
Global  behaviour  [12].    In  fact,  the  subject  of 
assigning  local  strategies  is  of  current  research,  and 
practical, interest. A methodology whereby agents are 
equipped with a host of strategies at design time, and 
then  learn  through  interaction  the  appropriate  local 
strategy to use in a given situation has been proposed 
by [16]. 

The ideal situation would be where agents are able to 
dynamically  develop  their  own  local  behaviours,  with 
the  outcome  of  the  given  user  desired  Global 
behaviour,  in  response  to  the  environment  in  which 
they  operate.  A  possibility  would  be  for  agents  to 

identify  certain  situations  using  pattern  recognition 
techniques,  and  then  act  upon  these  situations  using 
learned responses.  

We present a study in this paper whereby agents learn 
response to situations, or local strategy, from an entity 
with  a  global  view  of  the  problem.  In  this  way  we 
theorise  that the  agents  will  learn  local strategies  that 
are  likely  to  lead  to  the  overall  globally  desired 
behaviour  of  the  system.  Firstly,  we  give  a  short 
background  to  the  domain  of  Multi-Agent  systems, 
and  of 
learning  and  evolutionary 
technology  we  use  in  the  study.  We  then  present  the 
details  of  the  study,  and  a  brief  analysis  of  our 
findings.  

the  machine 

2.  Background 

2.1  Multi Agent Systems 

The  multi-agent  paradigm,  in  which  many  agents 
operate  in  an  environment, has  become  a  useful  tool 
in solving large scale problems through a “divide and 
conquer”  strategy  [7].  The  Multi-agent  system  is  a 
distributed,  decentralised  system.  The  paradigm  of 
individual  entities  collaborating  to  solve  a  particular 
problem that  is beyond  each  entities  own  capabilities 
is a natural concept, and one that is proving to be very 
powerful  in  practice  [8].  However,  while  the  concept 
is  easily  understandable,  the  implementation  is  not 
trivial.  There  are  many  complexities  and  subtleties  in 
these such as [7]: 

•  Decomposing and allocating problems to 

the agents 

•  Describing the problem to the agents 
•  Enabling  communication  and  interaction 

among the agents 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Decentralised  systems,  in  the  context  of  Multi-
Agent  systems,  promise  the  following  advantages 
[7][9][3][4][10] 

•  No  single  failure  point,  therefore  greater 
robustness.  Multi-agent systems  have  the 
capacity to degrade gracefully.   

•  Possibility  of  faster  response  times  and 
fewer  delays  as  the  logic/intelligence  is 
situated nearer to the problem domain.   
Increased  flexibility  to  take  account  of 
the  problem 
changes  occurring 
domain.  

in 

• 

•  Modularity  and  Scalability.  Multi-agent 
systems  can  be 
size 
dynamically according to the demands of 
the problem.  

increased 

in 

The problems associated with Multi-agent systems 

are [4][2][7][11]: 

•  Difficulty in measuring and evaluating the 
stability and security of the system. 
•  Excessive communication between agents 
can  slow  down  the  system.  This  is  often 
countered  by  heavily 
the 
amount  of  communication  between 
agents.  

restricting 

•  Possibility of getting stuck in non-optimal 
solutions of the problem, often due to the 
lack of global knowledge of the problem 
from each agent’s point of view.  

•  Most  Multi-agent  systems  are  built  in  an 
ad-hoc  way  since  there  is  no  absolute 
theory  for  these  types  of  systems.  There 
have  been  recent  attempts  however,  to 
formalise  the  design  of  agent  based 
systems,  such  as  the  Gaia  Methodology 
[9].  However 
in 
widespread use.  

these  are  not  yet 

agents  in  the  system.  The  communication  between 
agents  is  usually  performed  indirectly  [3],  by  agents 
making  changes  to  the  environment,  which  other 
agents  act  upon.  This  is  analogous  to  insects  laying 
pheromone  trails  to  food  source,  etc.  Emphasis  is 
therefore placed on reactivity in these systems.  Swarm 
systems  have  been  successfully  applied  to  many 
problems,  notably  routing  in  computer  and  telecoms 
networks  [2]  and  recently  to  a  manufacturing  control 
system [3]. 

The disadvantage of swarm based systems is that 
no agents actually have  a global view of the problem 
to  be  solved.  All  agents  are  entirely  focused  on 
achieving their own Local Goals, whether or not these 
goals  are  to  the  benefit  or  detriment  to  the  overall 
community.  This  can  exacerbate  the  problem  of  the 
system  getting  stuck  in  local  optima,  or  worse,  cause 
the system to  fail.  

The  advantage  of  a  centralised  system,  where 
there  is  effectively  one  agent  or  processing  unit  to 
control  the  whole  system,  is  that  such  a  system  will 
make decisions which will benefit the Global Goal of 
the system.  

2.2  Neural Networks 

Artificial  neural  networks  are  inspired  by  the 
functioning  of  biological  neurons  in  animal  and 
human  brains.  Artificial  neural  networks  differ  from 
most other computing techniques in that they are able 
to  learn  arbitrary  relations  between  sets  of  data 
presented  to  them.  That  is,  rules  are  not  explicitly 
programmed  or  set,  but  are  learned  from  experience 
by the network [4]. The basic architecture of a neural 
network  is  also  based  on  that  of  their  biological 
counterpart:  both  networks  consist  of  many  simple 
elements,  known  as  neurons,  operating  in  parallel  [5] 
[6]. The most widely used neural network models are 
the  Multi-layer  perceptron  (MLP)  and  Radial  Basis 
Function (RBF) networks.  

2.1.1  Swarm Based systems 

2.3  Genetic Algorithms 

Swarm  intelligence  is  a  particular  paradigm  for 
multi-agent systems which emphasizes distributedness 
and agent simplicity. It is based on the observations of 
social insects in nature, such as ants, termites and bees 
[2]. Such insect societies are extremely organized, even 
though  there  is  no  central  control  or  planning.  Each 
agent in the system is programmed only to achieve its 
own  Local  Goal.  The  agent’s  behaviours  in  Swarms 
are  very  simple:  the  intelligence  of  the  system  is 
‘emergent’  from  the  overall  behaviours  of  all  the 

Genetic  Algorithms  (GAs)  are  inspired  by  the 
process  of  natural  selection  and  evolution  in  nature. 
GAs  are  a  class  of  non-greedy  algorithms  –  they 
perform an exploration of the search space. GAs were 
first  proposed  by  John  Holland  in  1975  [19]  and  can 
be  thought  of  as  four  modules:  Encoding,  Selection, 
Recombination and Evaluation. Of the modules, only the 
Evaluation Function is problem specific. With a GA, 
possible  solutions  to  a  problem  are  encoded  as  a 

 
the 

each  generation, 

chromosome string. A population of chromosomes make 
up a generation of possible solutions to the problem. 
From 
each 
chromosome  is  evaluated  by  the  problem-specific 
Evaluation module. Certain chromosomes are selected 
by the selection module, by some procedure, and the 
selected  chromosomes  are 
the 
Recombination module to form the next generation of 
chromosomes.   

the  mated  by 

fitness  of 

3.  Hypothesis of study 
Reference  [1]  states  that  the  method  of  human 
learning  when  presented  by  a  new  task  is  to  use 
rational  reasoning  to  perform  the  decision  making 
process  behind  solving  the  task.  After  using  this 
deliberative  approach,  and  we  begin  to  “master”  a 
task,  we  are  able  to  perform  it  “naturally”,  without 
explicitly performing rational reasoning. At this point, 
people  use  their  pattern recognition  skills  to  perform 
the task.  

It  is  hypothesised  that  the  human  model  of 
discovery  and  learning  can  be  applied  to  agent 
strategising.  Evolutionary  optimisation  and  genetic 
programming  techniques  can  be  used  to  discover 
strategies  for  the  agent  community.  These  methods 
are  desirable  due  to  the  large  number  of  possible 
solutions to the problem. This will be the deliberative 
stage, where a problem solution is formulated. Once a 
strategy  has  been  discovered  and  used,  a  neural 
network  can  be  trained  with  the  results.  This  is  the 
Pattern Recognition stage.  Thus over time, the neural 
networks  should  learn  a  large  number  of  strategies, 
while  generalising  these  strategies  to  other  scenarios. 
Thus,  as  agents  perform  more  tasks,  the  problem 
solving  should  become  “natural”  to  them,  as  the 
neural  networks  start  taking  over  from  the  genetic 
programming and optimisation modules.  

4.  Method 
Our  paper  is  to  link  the  qualities  of  the  Swarm 
based 
(or  highly  decentralised  system)  with  a 
Centralised  system.  To  do  this,  we  propose  a  system 
that  consists  of  both  a  Centralised  control,  and  a 
swarm  of  agents.    Our  method  aims  to  use  the 
Centralised  control 
in  the  deliberative  phase  of 
problem  solving,  and  then  switch  to  a  distributed 
system  once  the  problem  solutions,  as  discovered  by 
the  Centralised  system,  have  been  learned  by  the 
subconscious of the agents.  

4.1  Test Problem 

The  proposed  system  is  applied  to  the  game  of 
Pursuit.  A  Pursuit  board  is  represented  by  a  2 
dimensional  grid  pattern,  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The 
asterisks represent the Captor agents, while the circle 
represents  the  Fugitive  agent  (top  row).  The  aim  of 
the game is for the Captors to surround or corner the 
Fugitive.  Each  agent  may  only  move  one  block  per 
turn. Legal moves on a Pursuit board are Up, Down, 
Left, Right and Stay. No diagonal moves are allowed.  
At  least  one  captor  agent  must  move  during  the 
captors’ move. Furthermore, the board does not wrap 
around.    A  game  is  ended  when  the  fugitive  is 
captured,  implying  that  the  fugitive  has  no  place  to 
move to.  

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 1 Pursuit Board representation 

System Description  

4.2 
The architecture of the system is to have four separate 
agents  representing  the  captors.  Each  of  the  agents 
has a neural network, which are trained independently 
of each other. Each agent is responsible for making a 
valid move.  

The system also has a Genetic Algorithm based agent, 
which can control all of the Captor agents, called the 
Global  Agent.    It  has  a  global  view  of  the  system. 
When  the  Global  Agent  is  invoked,  it  acts  as  a 
centralised  system,  which  proposes  moves  that  best 
satisfy the Global goal of the system.  

The system operation is shown in flowchart form 
in Figure 2. At each turn for the captors to move, the 
Captor agents are invoked. The proposed moves from 
each of the captors are then combined, and the result 
is tested for legality.  If the proposed moves for all the 
captors  are 
implemented 
synchronously.  If  not,  the  Global  Agent  is  invoked, 

the  moves  are 

legal, 

 
 
 
 
 
and  the  moves  proposed  by  the  Global  Agent  are 
implemented. The new move data is then used to re-
train the Captor Agents.  

4.3  Captor Agents Description  

The  agents  each  contain  a  neural  network.  The 
network inputs are the current relative positions of all 
other agents (captors and fugitive) on the board to the 
agent.  There  are  five  outputs  for  each  network,  each 
representing  a  particular  direction  in  which  the  agent 
should move. 

4.3.1   Board Representation and Training 

applications 

[13][14][15]. 

The  input  representation  to  a  neural  network  is 
important  to  the  success  of  practical 
extremely 
Smooth 
network 
representation  of  the  input  data,  as  well  as  using  an 
input  representation  that  describes  features  of  the  data 
can help reduce the number of states the network has 
to  learn  in  a  lookup-table  type  fashion,  and  increase 
the ability of the network to generalise learned data to 
new situations [15].  

Figure 2 System Flow Diagram 

The  fugitive  agent  has  no  real  intelligence;  it 

merely chooses a (legal) move at random.  

The  system  is  thus  a  hybrid  Centralised/Swarm 
system.  The  centralized  system  is  effectively  used  to 
train  the  multi-agent  system.  The  advantage  of  this 
arrangement is that the centralized system has a global 
view of the Pursuit board. The Centralised system, as 
represented  by  the  Global  Agent  is  programmed  to 
favour  a  solution  that  minimises  the  sum  of  all  the 
captor’s distances from the fugitive. In other words, it 
looks  for  an  arrangement  of  the  captors  that  will 
maximally  surround  the  fugitive.  If  a  pure  swarm 
system  approach  were  to  be  followed,  a 
likely 
implementation  would  be  one  where  each  agent 
attempts  to  minimize  its  own  distance  from  the 
fugitive.  This  will  cause  agents  to  get  in  each  others 
way, by blocking, or will result in an inferior strategy 
by  the  agents,  since  they  are  not  prepared  to  make 
sacrifice to their positions, even if it would result in a 
globally better arrangement of the captors.  

Initially, as the system is run, it operates mainly as 
a Centralised system, with the Global Agent proposing 
most of the moves. As time progresses, however, the 
Captor  agents  start  performing  more  of  the  moves 
and the system edges towards a swarm system.  

For 

implement 

this  study,  we 

the  board 
representation  as  a  set  of  relative  differences  in 
position. Each Captor agent has the relative positions 
of  the  other  captors  inputted  in  order  of  Cartesian 
distance.  The  relative  position  of  the  fugitive  is  then 
given as the last two inputs. This is depicted in Figure 
3. 

Figure 3 Network Input representation 

This  representation  allows  various  formations  of  the 
agents to be captured, regardless of the exact location 
on  the  Pursuit  board.  Such  formations  are  common 
when the captors are chasing the fugitive.  

The  Captor  Agents  are 

trained  on  moves 
discovered  by  the  Global  Agent,  using  its  Genetic 
Algorithm.  Each  Captor  is  trained  with  data  specific 
to  its  own  experience  on  the  board.  Training  the 
agents from a centralised system means that the direct 
communication  between  agents  can  be  drastically 

 
 
 
 
reduced.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  each  agent  will 
take  into  account  other  agents  moves  when  moving 
itself.  Therefore,  in  terms  of  communication,  the 
system  acts  as  a  swarm  system,  but  with  one  major 
difference:  each  agent  is  “aware”  of  the  global  goal 
through  the  training  it  has  received  from  the  Global 
Agent, and so inherently acts cooperatively with other 
agents. 

4.4  Global Agent Description 

The  evaluation  function  for  a  chromosome  of 
is  calculated  by  summing  the  Euclidean 
moves 
distance  of  each  of  the  Captor  agents  from  the 
Fugitive agent.  This is given by: 

=

S

M

∑

N

=
1

(

X

N

−

X

2

)

A

+

Y
(

N

−

Y

A

2

)

Where:  S  is  the  sum  of  the  distances  to  the 
fugitive;  M  is  the  number  of  Captor  agents  in  the 
system;  XA,  YA  are  the  Fugitive  agent’s  coordinates 
and XN, YN are the current Captor’s coordinates.  

that 

In  order 

to  ensure 

illegal  moves  are 
discouraged, a penalty scheme is used where the sum 
is  multiplied  by  a  large  number  in  order  to  create  a 
peak  in  the  evaluation  function.  Similarly,  to  ensure 
that a winning move (when possible) is chosen clearly 
above  any  other  possible  legal  combination,  such  as 
move is heavily rewarded.   

5.  Implementation 
The  system  is  implemented  in  MATLAB.  The 
Genetic  Algorithm  toolbox  used  is  the  open  source 
GAOT [18]. NETLAB [17] is used to implement the 
neural  networks  for  the  Captor  Agents.  A  two-layer 
MLP  architecture  is  used  for  the  networks.  The 
networks  use  a  Logistical  function  for  the  output 
units.  A  variable  number  of  hidden  units  are  used, 
depending  on  the  amount  of  data  the  network  has 
seen.  

Since NETLAB does not directly support on-line 
training, an alternative scheme is used. Every time the 
Global  Agent  is  invoked,  the  board  position  is 
recorded,  as  well  as  the  moves  proposed  by  the 
Global Agent. This data is added to the set of training 
data.  After  each  game  is  complete,  the  agents  are  re-
trained using the updated training data.  

5.1  Discussion 

Despite the fact that Pursuit is a very simple game, the 
successful suggestion of moves  by the  community  of 
agents  is  quite  significant.  Firstly,  to  make  a  legal 
move, all the agents have to be aware of the rules of 
the  game,  which  has  not  been  explicitly  programmed 
into  them.  Secondly,  successful  moves  invariably 
require some degree of cooperation with neighbouring 
agents.  Usually,  this  is  achieved  by  explicitly  using 
communication  between  agents.  In  this  system,  there 
is  no  such  communication.  Successful  moves  mean 
that  the  agents  are  able  to  anticipate  each  other’s 
actions.  

After  a  large  number  of  games,  each  agent  will  have 
observed  a  large  variety  of  board  positions,  and  for 
this  system,  the  neural  networks  will  tend  to  be  the 
same. This is only because the agents in this system all 
have  the  same  “abilities”  or  allowed  moves.  In  a 
scenario where there are agents with different abilities, 
as  for  the  separate  pieces  in  chess,  the  networks  will 
each  train  on  totally  different  output  moves,  and  so 
will  tend  to  be  different  even  after  observing  an 
infinite  number  of  moves.  However,  there  is  no 
reason  why  the  agents  should  not  still  be  able  to 
anticipate each others moves, since they will be trained 
with this data.  

6.  Recommendations and Further work 

On many of the occasions, the agents were not able to 
make  a  legal  move  due  to  the  fact  that  some  agents 
suggested  more  than  one  direction  to  move  in  at  a 
time. While this intuitively suggests that the agents are 
not  yet  well  trained  in  the  particular  situation,  this  is 
often  not  the  case.  The  genetic  algorithm  does  not 
always propose the same result for a particular board 
position. This  means  that for  a  given  board  position, 
an  agent  may  be  trained  with  many  possible  moves. 
What  is  needed  is  a  method  to  resolve  the  proposed 
multiple directions by an agent in a particular situation 
with the other agents.  

Further  work  involves  a  methodology  allowing  the 
agents  themselves  to  formulate  a  global  strategy, 
without  relying  on  the  external  Global  agent.  This 
could  be  a  simple  principle  such  as  distributing  the 
evaluations  of  the  Genetic  Algorithm  populations 
among the agents, or more elaborate methods.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.  Conclusion 

The  study  of  a  hybrid  Centralised-Swarm  agent 
community  has  been  discussed  in  this  paper.  The 
implementation  of  a  proposed  architecture,  in  the 
form 
the 
a  Genetic  Algorithm 
Centralised/Global  agent,  and  as  neural  networks  as 
swarm agents, is applied to the game of pursuit.  

of 

as 

We found that although the swarm, or Captor, agents 
are able to learn a large number of moves, the fact that 
more than one move may be applicable in a situation 
results  in  agents  proposing  all  these  possibilities  in  a 
situation. This needs to be resolved within the swarm 
system to result in a valid move.  

The  possibility  of  reduced  communication  between 
agents,  while  still  cooperating  with  each  other  is 
demonstrated here.  

8.  References 
[1]  R.  Kurzweil,  “The  age  of  intelligent  Machines”, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  1990.  pp 
231- 234 

[2]  E.  Bonabeau,  M.  Dorigo,  G  Theraulaz.  “Swarm 
Intelligence – From Natural to Artificial Systems”, 
Oxford University Press, 1999. 

and  Design”.  Autonomous  Agents  and  Multi-
Agent Systems, 3, 2000. pg  285-12 

[10]  N.R Jennings, M. Woodridge.” Intelligent Agents: 
practice”, 
Theory 
The  Knowledge 
Engineering Review, 10 (2), pg 115-152, 1995.   

and 

[11]  Maria  Chli,  Philippe  De  Wilde,  Jan  Goossenaerts, 
Vladimir  Abramov,  Nick  Szirbik,  Pedro  Mariano, 
Rita  Riberio,    “Stability  of  Multi  Agent  Systems”, 
IEEE  International  Conference  on  Systems,  Man 
and  Cybernetics  2003,  Volume  1,  Oct  5-8,  2003, 
Pages: 551-556 

[12]  J.A.  Marshall,  Z.  Lin,  M.E.  Brouke,  B.A  Francis, 
“Pursuit  Strategies 
for  Autonomous  Agents”, 
Proceedings  of  the  2003  Block  Island  Workshop 
on  Cooperative  Control.  Springer-Verlag  Series: 
Information 
Lecture  Notes 
Sciences, 2004.  

in  Control  and 

[13]  Sebastian  Thrun,  “Learning  to  Play  the  Game  of 
Chess”, Advances in Neural Processing Systems 7, 
1995. 

[14]  G.  Tesauro,  “Programming  backgammon  using 
self-teaching  neural  net”,  Artificial  Intelligence 
134(2002) pp 181-199. 

[15]  G.Tesauro,  “Practical 

in  Temporal 
Difference Learning”, Machine Learning 8 (1992), 
pp. 257-277. 

Issues 

[3]  Hadelia,,  P.  Valckenaersa,  M.  Kollingbaumb,  H. 
Van  Brussel,  “Multi-agent  coordination  and 
control  using  stigmergy”,  Computers  in  Industry 
53, 2004, pp 75–96 

[16]  C.  B.  Excelente-Toledo  and  N.  R.  Jennings    "The 
dynamic  selection  of  Coordination  Mechanisms" 
Autonomous  Agents  and  Multi  Agent  Systems  9, 
2004, pp 55-85 

[4]  Nils.  J  Nilsson,  “Artificial  Intelligence:  A  new 
synthesis”,  Morgan  Kaufmann  Publishers,  San 
Francisco, California, 1998. 

[17]  I.  Nabney,  “Netlab  –  Algorithms  for  Pattern 
Recognition”,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  New  York, 
2001 

[18]  The  Genetic  Algorithm  Optimization  Toolbox 
Matlab, 
Last 

(GAOT) 
http://www.ie.ncsu.edu/mirage/GAToolBox/gaot/, 
accessed 19 May 2004.  

for 

[19]  J.  Holland.  “Adaptation  in  Natural  and  Artificial 
Systems”, University of Michigan Press, 1975.  

[5]  Alison  Cawsey,  “The  Essence  of  Artificial 

Intelligence”, Prentice Hall Europe, 1998. 

[6]  M.  Jordan,  C.  Bishop,  “Neural  Networks”, 
Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology,  Last  accessed  12  August 
2003, ftp.publications.ai.mit.edu. 

[7]  K.P. Sycara. “Multiagent Systems”. AI Magazine, 
American  Association  for  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Summer 1998. pp 79-92. 

[8]  J.J.  Castro–Schez,  N.R  Jennings,  X.  Luo,  NR 
Shadbolt.  “Acquiring  Domain  Knowledge 
for 
negotiating  agents:  A  case  study”,  International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 61 (1), 2004, 
pp 3-31. 

[9]  N.R.    Jennings,  M.  Wooldridge,  D.  Kinny,  “The 
Gaia  Methodology  for  Agent-Oriented  Analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
