Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward
in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Wendelin B¨ohmer 1 Tabish Rashid 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

9
1
0
2

n
u
J

5

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
3
1
2
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
This paper investigates the use of intrinsic reward
to guide exploration in multi-agent reinforcement
learning. We discuss the challenges in applying
intrinsic reward to multiple collaborative agents
and demonstrate how unreliable reward can pre-
vent decentralized agents from learning the op-
timal policy. We address this problem with a
novel framework, Independent Centrally-assisted
Q-learning (ICQL), in which decentralized agents
share control and an experience replay buffer with
a centralized agent. Only the centralized agent
is intrinsically rewarded, but the decentralized
agents still beneﬁt from improved exploration,
without the distraction of unreliable incentives.

1. Introduction

Recent successes in challenging computer games like Star-
Craft 2 (Vinyals et al., 2019) have raised interest in Multi-
agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). Here single units
are modeled as individual agents, for example, in the re-
cent open source StarCraft Multi-agent Challenge (SMAC,
Samvelyan et al., 2019). In comparison to single-agent deep
RL, MARL faces some unique challenges, in particular de-
centralization and coordination. In this paper we investigate
the equally challenging problem of directed exploration.

Directed exploration in single-agent deep RL still poses
many open questions, like how to generalize visitation
counts in large input spaces and how to change the ex-
ploration policy quickly towards newly discovered states.
However, so far, there has been little work on exploration
for deep MARL. Exploration in MARL differs from the
single-agent setting in some challenging ways: (i) count-
ing visitations of state-action pairs is infeasible for many
agents, due to the large joint-action space; (ii) as unexpected
outcomes can be caused by multiple agents, it is not clear

1Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Wendelin B¨ohmer <wen-
delin.boehmer@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Accepted to the 2 nd Exploration in Reinforcement Learning Work-
shop at the International Conference on Machine Learning 2019.

which agent’s action should be reinforced; and (iii) partial
observability decreases the reliability of count estimates.

Decentralization is required in MARL when the agents can-
not communicate directly. Moreover, a centralized control
policy is often infeasible, as the joint-action space grows
exponentially in the number of agents. In line with SMAC,
we consider the case where the state of the system is only
partially observable by each agent, although during training
the global state may be available. This is called central-
ized training with decentralized execution (Foerster et al.,
2016). This paper focuses on the simplest value-based algo-
rithm in this class, a variant of Independent Q-learning (IQL,
Tan, 1993), where each agent acts on partial observations
and assumes the other agents’ decisions are an unobserved,
stationary part of the environment.

However, these simple decentralized agents lack coordina-
tion. Take the example of two predators, who trapped their
prey in a corner. To catch it, both must attack simultane-
ously, as it will escape if only one predator attacks. From
the perspective of each predator, the reward for attacking
depends on the actions of the other. When the punishment
for letting the prey escape is larger than the reward for
catching it, neither agent will learn the optimal strategy
independently. There are multiple methods using central-
ized training to mitigate this effect for decentralized poli-
cies, e.g., multi-agent credit assignment (COMA, Foerster
et al., 2018) and bootstrapping with an approximation of the
joint Q-value function. For example, Value Decomposition
Networks (VDN, Sunehag et al., 2018) optimize the joint
Q-value, but restrict the Q-value function to a sum of indi-
vidual agents’ utilities. QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) goes one
step further and mixes the agents’ utilities with a non-linear
hyper-network, that conditions on the global state. Both
approaches can execute the decentralized learned policy by
maximizing each agent’s utility. However, all the above
techniques use relatively simple (cid:15)-greedy exploration.

Value-based algorithms that explore provably efﬁciently in a
tabular setting (e.g. Jin et al., 2018) rely on optimism in the
face of uncertainty. There are two major lines of research
in the literature: to use intrinsic reward to over-estimate
uncertain state-action values or to use Thompson sampling
from a Bayesian posterior of the value function. Various

 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

techniques have been proposed to estimate the uncertainty
of state-action values (summarized in Appendix B), but
whether it is used as an intrinsic reward or as the standard
deviation of a Gaussian posterior, most works converge at
an estimate that is supposed to scale with 1/(cid:112)Nt(st, ut),
where Nt(st, ut) counts how often state st and action ut
have been observed at time t. For large input spaces, how-
ever, these estimates are rough approximations of visitation
counts and the resulting uncertainties are highly unreliable.

This paper investigates estimated intrinsic reward for decen-
tralized IQL agents. We evaluate the variance of linear func-
tions (O’Donoghue et al., 2018) as an uncertainty estimate
in a novel predator-prey task that emphasizes exploration.
We observe empirically that the intrinsic reward accelerates
learning, but remains inherently unreliable, which prevents
ﬁnding the optimal solution. To learn reliable decentral-
ized policies in the face of unreliable reward, we propose
to share control with a second agent that is discarded after
training and can thus be centralized. Only the central agent
receives intrinsic rewards, which prevents the decentralized
agents from being distracted, while still improving their
exploratory behavior. We show that this new approach to
MARL exploration drastically speeds up learning of the
decentralized agents, while converging to the optimal solu-
tion. This novel framework is general and can be applied
to different estimators of intrinsic reward and/or off-policy
MARL algorithms like VDN and QMIX.

2. Background

We restrict ourselves to cooperative tasks, modeled as a
Dec-POMDP (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016), that is, a tuple
(cid:104)S, {U a}, P, r, {Z a}, {Oa}, n, γ(cid:105). The global state of the
system is denoted as s ∈ S, and each of the n agents
chooses actions ua ∈ U a, which together form the joint
action u ∈ U. After executing joint action ut in state st at
discrete time step t, the next state st+1 is drawn from tran-
sition kernel P (st+1|st, ut), and a reward rt := r(st, ut)
is determined by the reward function r : S × U → IR.
While a centralized joint policy πc(u|st) can choose joint
actions u conditioned on the current state st, a decentral-
ized agent policy πa(ua|τ a
t ) draws only agent a’s action
ua ∈ U a, based on the agent’s current trajectory τ a
t of
i ∈ Z a, which are
past actions ua
i and observations za
drawn from the agent’s observation kernel Oa(za
i |si), that
is, τ a
t ]. Execution of a joint pol-
icy π yields an episode with return Rt := (cid:80)∞
i=t γi−tri
at time t. Our goal is to ﬁnd a decentralized joint pol-
a=1 πa(ua|τ a
icy π(u|{τ a
t ), which maximizes the
expected return for each observed trajectory. Partial observ-
ability of the policy can signiﬁcantly slow down learning
and we allow access to the global state during training, that
is, centralized training for decentralized execution.

t }) := (cid:81)n

1, . . . , za

t := [za

1 , ua

0 , ua

0, za

2.1. Independent Q-learning (IQL)

t ) := IEπ[Rt|τ a

t , that is, Qa(ua|τ a

Independent Q-learning (Tan, 1993) approaches this goal by
deﬁning the state-action value function of agent a as the ex-
pectation of the return, following policy π from an observed
t , ua]. As in
trajectory τ a
Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), IQL assumes that the
greedy policy, which chooses the action with the largest
corresponding value, maximizes the expected return in each
state. Note that this is not true, as the expected return also
depends on the other agents’ behavior, which can introduce
non-stationarity. That being said, IQL appears to be stable
in practice and works quite well in most tasks.

We use a neural network with one head for each discrete
action to approximate the value function (as in DQN, Mnih
et al., 2015). For IQL, we learn a function1 qa
θ (ua|τ a
t ),
parameterized by θ, with gradient-descend on the expected
squared Bellman error
(cid:104) ∞(cid:80)

θ(cid:48)(u(cid:48)|τ a
qa

t+1)−qa

θ (ua

t |τ a

(cid:0)rt +γ max

t )(cid:1)2(cid:105)

, (1)

IE

min
θ

t=0

u(cid:48)

where θ(cid:48) are the parameters of a target network, which are
replaced with a copy of the current parameters θ from time to
time to improve stability. The expectation is approximated
by drawing mini-batches of trajectories from an experience
replay buffer (Lin, 1992). We also use double Q-learning
(Hasselt et al., 2016) to further improve stability and share
the parameters θ of all agents’ value functions for better
generalization (similar to QMIX, Rashid et al., 2018).

2.2. Intrinsic Reward

We employ a local uncertainty measure introduced by
O’Donoghue et al. (2018). The variance of a linear re-
gression, i.e., ﬁtting a linear function f (u|s) = w(cid:62)
u φ(s)
to a ﬁxed set of state-action pairs {si, ui}t
i=1 and random
labels yi with a Gaussian distribution N (yi|y(si), σ2), is
Vt[f ](u|s) = σ2 φ(s)(cid:62)(cid:16) t(cid:80)

δuiu φ(si)φ(si)

φ(s) . (2)

(cid:17)−1

i=1

As each head of the IQL value function qa(ua|τ a
t ) is a lin-
ear function of the last network layer, that is, the hidden
state φa(τ a
t ) of a GRU, O’Donoghue et al. (2018) sug-
gest to use r+
t ) as a measure of local
t
uncertainty. This choice of intrinsic reward is somewhat
justiﬁed, as for one-hot coded φ(st), the intrinsic reward
t = σ/(cid:112)Nt(st, ut), which corresponds to the tabular
is r+
case (e.g., in Jin et al., 2018) with scaling factor σ.

:= (cid:112)Vt[qa](ua

t |τ a

1To condition on trajectories τ a

t , we follow Hausknecht &
Stone (2015) and use a recurrent network of GRU units (Chung
et al., 2014), which condition on their hidden state, the last action
t−1, the current observation za
ua

t and the agent id a.

Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

3. Method

Intrinsic reward based on estimated uncertainties rarely re-
ﬂects the precise visitation counts. We investigate how such
unreliable intrinsic reward can still reliably improve explo-
ration of decentralized agents. The main idea is to introduce
a second controller during training that can be discarded af-
terwards. This joint agent is intrinsically rewarded and can
thus explore the environment in a directed fashion. In princi-
ple, the agent’s policy could be learned by many algorithms.
As it is only active during training, though, we propose a
centralized agent, which conditions on the more informa-
tive global state. Most importantly, we train simultaneously
the decentralized agents, which will be later deployed for
execution, on the same replay buffer. These can utilize any
decentralized off-policy learning algorithm, but we focus in
the following on IQL for simplicity.

3.1. A Central MARL Agent

The large action spaces in MARL make individual heads
for each joint action u on value functions infeasible in the
face of many agents. Maximizing a value function that con-
ditions on all agents’ actions, on the other hand, has to be
evaluated for all u as well, which can be prohibitively ex-
pensive. Instead, we use the architecture of a COMA critic,
which Foerster et al. (2018) introduced in the context of a
policy gradient method. They deﬁne an agent-speciﬁc joint-
value function qa
ψ, parameterized by ψ, which has a head for
each of a’s actions ua
t and conditions on the global state, all
other agents’ actions u−a
, . . . , un
t ]
t
and agent a’s the previous action ua
t |st, u−a

t , . . . , ua−1
t−1:

!
≈ IE[Rt|st, ut] .

, ua+1
t

ψ(ua
qa

:= [u1

t−1)

, ua

(3)

t

t

Instead of maximizing this function w.r.t. the joint action
ut, we propose here to approximate a local maximum by
iteratively choosing the ua
t that maximizes each individual
agent’s qa
ψ, and using it for u−a in the next iteration of the
maximization. In practice, we initialize ut with the greedy
actions of the decentralized IQL agents and then perform
this iterative local maximization (denoted lmax) for a small
number of iterations. As in IQL, agents share parameters ψ.

min
ψ

IE

(cid:104)T −1(cid:80)

n(cid:80)

(cid:0)Gλ

t − qa

ψ(ua

t |st, u−a

t

t−1)(cid:1)2(cid:105)

, ua

,

(4)

t=0

a=1

is minimized by gradient descent, where the expectation is
approximated with the same mini-batches as in IQL and the
same stabilization techniques are used as well.

3.2. Intrinsic Reward Revisited

Intrinsic rewards, as deﬁned in Section 2.2, induce three
challenges for collaborative MARL: dependence on joint
actions, collaborative rewards, and evolving parameters.

First, estimating (2) is infeasible for MARL, as we would
have to estimate one correlation matrix for each joint action
u. Instead of estimating a measure that depends on counting
Nt(st, ut), we propose here to estimate one based on the
count Nt(st+1). Although only a heuristic, this approach
works in arbitrary large action spaces.

Second, in collaborative tasks all agents should receive the
same reward to avoid diverging incentives. However, in
MARL each agent a estimates a different uncertainty, based
on a’s observations and/or other inputs. As the interaction
of all agents could have contributed to each agent’s uncer-
tainty, it is unclear how to reconcile diverging estimates. We
propose to use the largest uncertainty as intrinsic reward for
all agents, to consider this potential interaction.

Third, the agents’ value function parameters continually
change, particularly in the beginning of training when explo-
ration is most important. The same inputs x yield different
representations φa(x) at different times t, and estimates
with (2) therefore become outdated after a while. To re-
ﬂect this change, we propose to use an exponentially decay-
ing average of the inverted matrix Ct := (1 − α) Ct−1 +
(cid:80)n
(xt), where xt denotes the value function’s
inputs at time t and α is a small decay constant. As the
resulting uncertainty never decays to 0, we also introduce
a bias bt and discard negative intrinsic rewards. The bias
can be constant or an average over past uncertainties to only
reward states with above average novelty.
The resulting collaborative intrinsic reward r+
t

(xt) φa(cid:62)

a=1 φa

is:

During exploration it is important that the sampling policy
changes in response to newly discovered states. This change
is imposed by intrinsic reward, which must therefore be
transported quickly to earlier states in the episode. We use
a Q(λ) implementation (Watkins, 1989) to accelerate this
transport, but do not cut the traces after exploratory steps.
This improves transport, but also introduces non-stationary
targets. Our training procedure performs a parameter update
after each episode and we compute the targets backwards:
Gλ

ψ(cid:48)(¯ua|st+1, ¯u−a, ua
qa

t := rt+(1−λ)γ lmax

¯u
where ψ(cid:48) denotes the target network and Gλ

t )+λγGλ
t+1 ,
T := 0. The loss

r+
t

:= σ max

(cid:110)

0, max
a

(cid:16)(cid:113)

(xt+1)C−1
φa(cid:62)

t φa

(xt+1) −bt

(cid:17)(cid:111)

. (5)

3.3. Independent Centrally-assisted Q-learning (ICQL)

The intrinsically rewarded central agent samples in our train-
ing framework episodes, while the decentralized (here IQL)
agents are simultaneously trained on the shared replay buffer.
This improves exploration in two ways: (i) although the de-
centralized agents still beneﬁt from the exploration that is
induced by (potentially unreliable) intrinsic reward, their
ﬁnal policies are exclusively based on environmental re-
wards, and (ii) the central agent conditions on the true state

Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

Figure 1. 4 agents hunt a mountain and a valley prey. We plot mean and standard error (over 8 seeds) of the training (left) and test
performance (right) of IQL, with and without intrinsic reward (i.e. magnitude σ), and of our centrally-assisted exploration framework
ICQL. Note that for ICQL training performance is 50% centralized, but test performance is 100% decentralized.

of the system, which includes information that may not be
observable by the agents.

However, sampling only with the central agent yields an
out-of-distribution problem for the IQL agents: a single
deviating decision can induce a trajectory that has never
been seen during training. We therefore share the sampling
process by deciding randomly at the start of an episode
whether the IQL agents or the central agent takes control.
The resulting behavior appears quite stable for different
probabilities of that choice and we chose 50% for simplicity.

4. Experiments

We extend a common partially observable predator-prey task
in a grid-world to make it challenging from an exploration
perspective, as preliminary experiments have shown that the
original task does not require directed exploration of the
state space.2 We train 4 agents, with 5 × 5 agent-centric
observations, to hunt a mountain and a valley prey. Prey
moves randomly in a bounded grid-world of height 41 and
width 10. To simulate a mountain, both agents and valley
prey do not execute 50% of all ‘up’ actions, and mountain
prey does not execute 50% of all ‘down’ actions. Valley
prey spawn randomly on the lowest row, mountain prey on
the highest row, and agents on middle row. An episode
ends either when one of the prey is caught, that is, when
agents/boundaries surround it on all sides, or after 100 steps.
Only capturing yields reward, 5 for the valley and 10 for the
mountain prey. Exploring the state space helps to ﬁnd the
mountain prey without getting distracted by the valley prey.

2In the original task, the prey moves randomly and the states in
which the agents meet it are almost uniformly distributed. This pro-
vides sufﬁcient exploration to ﬁnd an optimal policy and directed
exploration is unnecessary.

Figure 1 shows training and test performance3 for three
algorithms: the original IQL (red, Section 2.1), IQL with
intrinsic reward based on the agents’ last layers (green, Sec-
tion 3.2) and our novel centrally-assisted exploration frame-
work ICQL (blue, Section 3.3), where the intrinsic reward is
based on the last layer of the central agents’ value functions.

The destabilizing effect of unreliable intrinsic reward on
IQL can be seen in the green IQL (σ=1) curve: it speeds
up learning, but also prevents the agents from ﬁnding the
optimal policy (visible both in training and test plots). The
bonus provides incentives for exploration, but also appears
to distract the agents when their policy should converge.

Our ICQL framework (blue) learns even faster, but demon-
strates different behavior during training and testing. On the
one hand, one can see the same sub-optimal behavior dur-
ing training (left plot), which executes 50% of the episodes
with the intrinsically-rewarded central agent and 50% with
decentralized agents trained simultaneously. On the other
hand, the test performance (right plot) of the decentralized
agents shows the same improved learning, but none of the
instabilities once the mountain prey has been found.

We conclude that intrinsic reward is both a blessing and
a curse for MARL settings. We have shown that even un-
reliable reward can improve directed exploration, but also
introduces detracting incentives. Our novel ICQL frame-
work for centrally-assisted exploration appears to stabilize
learning and further speeds up training, most likely by ex-
ploiting access to the true state.

In future work, we will further evaluate how the framework
performs with different decentralized learning algorithms,
like VDN and QMIX, and employ other uncertainty esti-

3We implemented all algorithms in the PyMarl framework

(Samvelyan et al., 2019). Details can be found in Appendix A.

01M2M3M4MEnvironmental Steps02468105Mepisode reward during training (SEM)0Environmental Steps02468101M2M3M4M5MICQL (       )IQL (       )IQL (       )mountain preyreward forvalley preyreward forepisode reward during testing (SEM)Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

mates for intrinsic rewards. We also want to investigate the
effect of adaptive biases and apply our method to StarCraft
micromanagement tasks (SMAC, Samvelyan et al., 2019).

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Jakob F¨orster, Gregory
Farquhar and Christian Schroeder de Witt for fruitful discus-
sions about decentralization and exploration in MARL. This
project has received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC), under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement num-
ber 637713), and a grant of the EPSRC (EP/M508111/1,
EP/N509711/1). The experiments were made possible by a
generous equipment grant from NVIDIA.

References

Bellemare, M. G., Srinivasan, S., Ostrovski, G., Schaul, T.,
Saxton, D., and Munos, R. Unifying count-based explo-
ration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 29, pp. 1471–
1479, 2016.

Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Pathak, D., Storkey, A., Darrell, T.,
and Efros, A. A. Large-scale study of curiosity-driven
learning. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2019.

Chung, J., Gulcehre, C., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Empirical
evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence
modeling. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning, 2014.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.3555.

Foerster, J., Assael, I. A., de Freitas, N., and Whiteson,
S. Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS) 29, pp. 2137–2145. 2016.

Foerster, J. N., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and
Whiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients.
In Proceedings of the 15th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pp. 2974–2982, 2018.

Fortunato, M., Azar, M. G., Piot, B., Menick, J., Hessel, M.,
Osband, I., Graves, A., Mnih, V., Munos, R., Hassabis, D.,
Pietquin, O., Blundell, C., and Legg, S. Noisy networks
for exploration. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Gal, Y., Hron, J., and Kendall, A. Concrete dropout. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
pp. 3584–3593, 2017.

Hasselt, H. v., Guez, A., and Silver, D. Deep reinforcement
learning with double q-learning. In Proceedings of the

13th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 2094–
2100, 2016.

Hausknecht, M. J. and Stone, P. Deep recurrent q-
In 2015
URL

learning for partially observable mdps.
AAAI Fall Symposia, pp. 29–37, 2015.
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/
FSS/FSS15/paper/view/11673.

Jaques, N., Lazaridou, A., Hughes, E., G¨ulc¸ehre, C¸ ., Ortega,
P. A., Strouse, D., Leibo, J. Z., and de Freitas, N. Intrinsic
social motivation via causal inﬂuence in multi-agent RL.
CoRR, abs/1810.08647, 2018. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/1810.08647.

Jin, C., Allen-Zhu, Z., Bubeck, S., and Jordan, M. I. Is
Q-learning provably efﬁcient? In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 31, pp. 4863–
4873. 2018.

Leibo, J. Z., Hughes, E., Lanctot, M., and Graepel, T.
Autocurricula and the emergence of innovation from
social interaction: A manifesto for multi-agent intelli-
gence research. CoRR, abs/1903.00742, 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.00742.

Lin, L.-J. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforce-
ment learning, planning and teaching. Machine Learning,
8(3):293–321, 1992.

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Ve-
ness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M.,
Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C.,
Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wier-
stra, D., Legg, S., and Hassabis, D. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529–533, February 2015.

O’Donoghue, B., Osband, I., Munos, R., and Mnih, V. The
uncertainty Bellman equation and exploration. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), pp. 3836–3845, 2018.

Oliehoek, F. A. and Amato, C. A concise introduction
to decentralized POMDPs. Springer Publishing Com-
pany, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2016. ISBN 3319289276,
9783319289274.

Osband, I., Van Roy, B., and Wen, Z. Generalization and
In Pro-
exploration via randomized value functions.
ceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
2377–2386, 2016.

Osband, I., Aslanides, J., and Cassirer, A. Randomized prior
functions for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 31,
pp. 8617–8629. 2018.

Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 29, pp.
4790–4798. 2016.

Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Chung, J., Mathieu, M.,
Jaderberg, M., Czarnecki, W., Dudzik, A., Huang, A.,
Georgiev, P., ichard Powell, Ewalds, T., Horgan, D.,
Kroiss, M., Danihelka, I., Agapiou, J., Oh, J., Dalibard,
V., Choi, D., Sifre, L., Sulsky, Y., Vezhnevets, S., Molloy,
J., Cai, T., Budden, D., Paine, T., Gulcehre, C., Wang,
Z., Pfaff, T., Pohlen, T., Wu, Y., Yogatama, D., Cohen,
J., McKinney, K., Smith, O., Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T.,
Apps, C., Kavukcuoglu, K., Hassabis, D., and Silver,
D. AlphaStar: Mastering the real-time strategy game
StarCraft II. Deepmind blog, accessed 04/16/2019,
https://deepmind.com/blog/alphastar-ma
stering-real-time-strategy-game-starcr
aft-ii, 2019.

Watkins, C. and Dayan, P. Q-learning. Machine Learning,

8:279–292, 1992.

Watkins, C. J. C. H. Learning from delayed rewards. PhD

thesis, Cambridge University, 1989.

Zheng, S. and Yue, Y. Structured exploration via hierar-
chical variational policy networks, 2018. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=HyunpgbR-.

Ostrovski, G., Bellemare, M. G., van den Oord, A., and
Munos, R. Count-based exploration with neural density
models. In Proceedings of the 34th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2721–2730,
2017.

Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-
tion. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.

Plappert, M., Houthooft, R., Dhariwal, P., Sidor, S., Chen,
R. Y., Chen, X., Asfour, T., Abbeel, P., and Andrychow-
icz, M. Parameter space noise for exploration. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2018.

Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., de Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G.,
Foerster, J. N., and Whiteson, S. QMIX: monotonic value
function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML), pp. 4292–4301, 2018.

Roderick, M., Grimm, C., and Tellex, S. Deep abstract
Q-networks. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Sys-
tems (AAMAS), pp. 131–138, 2018.

Samvelyan, M., Rashid, T., de Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G.,
Nardelli, N., Rudner, T. G. J., Hung, C., Torr, P. H. S.,
Foerster, J. N., and Whiteson, S. The StarCraft multi-
agent challenge. CoRR, abs/1902.04043, 2019. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.04043.

Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zam-
baldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo,
J. Z., Tuyls, K., and Graepel, T. Value-decomposition net-
works for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team
reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems
(AAMAS), pp. 2085–2087, 2018.

Tan, M. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent
vs. cooperative agents. In In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 330–337, 1993.

Tang, H., Houthooft, R., Foote, D., Stooke, A., Xi Chen,
O., Duan, Y., Schulman, J., DeTurck, F., and Abbeel,
P. #Exploration: A study of count-based exploration
for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 30, pp. 2753–
2762. 2017.

van den Oord, A., Kalchbrenner, N., Espeholt, L.,
kavukcuoglu, k., Vinyals, O., and Graves, A. Conditional
image generation with PixelCNN decoders. In Advances

Exploration with Unreliable Intrinsic Reward in MARL

Appendix

A. Training details

We implemented all algorithms in the PyMARL framework
(Samvelyan et al., 2019), where we used RMSprop with
learning rate 0.0005, γ = 0.99, batch size 32 and a replay
buffer holding the last 200 episodes. Decentralized agents
had a hidden layer of 64 GRU cells, sandwiched between 2
feed-forward layers, and central agents had 3 feed-forward
layers with 128 hidden neurons each. The target network
was updated every 200 episodes and we used (cid:15)-greedy ex-
ploration, which decayed 1 ≥ (cid:15) ≥ 0.05 within 20,000 steps.
Intrinsic reward had magnitude σ = 1, a decay constant
α = 0.0002 and constant bias bt := 0.01. ICQL approxi-
mated the local maximum with one lmax iteration.

B. Related Work

In this paper we focus on intrinsic reward for exploration
(in difference to pure curiosity, Burda et al., 2019). Here the
uncertainty is often derived from to the prediction quality
after training on past trajectories. For example, pseudo-
counts are based on the reconstruction probability of visual
observations (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017),
using a PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016). Alternatively,
Tang et al. (2017) count visitations using a hash function
on a random linear projection. Furthermore, Pathak et al.
(2017) use the predictability of the observed transition as
intrinsic reward signal, and Roderick et al. (2018) reduce
uncertainty with prior knowledge over state abstractions.

In the context of Bayesian posteriors, the uncertainty has
been estimated from an ensemble of value functions, with
optional bootstrapping techniques (Osband et al., 2016;
2018). Alternatively, Noisy Nets (Fortunato et al., 2018;
Plappert et al., 2018) sample a value function for each
episode from a diagonal Gaussian posterior over the pa-
rameters of the neural network. Similarly, Gal et al. (2017)
suggested to use Concrete Dropout to estimate the posterior
for model-based RL. To include the uncertainty of future
reward, O’Donoghue et al. (2018) proposed the Uncertainty
Bellman Equation (UBE), which propagates the ‘local un-
certainty’ of future decisions with a Bellman operator.

For MARL, Zheng & Yue (2018) proposed to coordinate ex-
ploration by sharing latent variables, drawn from a learned
distribution. Jaques et al. (2018) focuses on social motiva-
tions of competitive agents and Leibo et al. (2019) describes
exploration as an auto-curriculum generated by competing
species of agents.

