The Design and Realization of Multi-agent Obstacle Avoidance 
based on Reinforcement Learning 

Enyu Zhaoa,b, Chanjuan Liua*, Houfu Sua, and Yang Liua 

a Department of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 
116024, China  

b University of Southern California Viterbi Department of Computer Science, 941 Bloom Walk, Los 

Angeles, CA 90089 

Abstract—  Intelligence  agents  and  multi-agent  systems  play 
important  roles  in  scenes  like  the  control  system  of  grouped 
drones,  and  multi-agent  navigation  and  obstacle  avoidance 
which is the foundational function of advanced application has 
great  importance.  In  multi-agent  navigation  and  obstacle 
avoidance tasks, the decision-making interactions and dynamic 
changes  of  agents  are  difficult  for  traditional  route  planning 
algorithms  or  reinforcement  learning  algorithms  with  the 
increased complexity of the environment. 

The  classical  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning  algorithm, 
Multi-agent  deep  deterministic  policy  gradient(MADDPG), 
solved  precedent  algorithms’  problems  of  having  unstationary 
training  process  and  unable  to  deal  with  environment 
randomness. However, MADDPG ignored the temporal message 
hidden  beneath  agents’  interaction  with  the  environment. 
Besides, due to its CTDE technique which let each agent’s critic 
network  to  calculate  over  all  agents’  action  and  the  whole 
environment  information,  it  lacks  ability  to  scale  to  larger 
amount of agents. 

To  deal  with  MADDPG’s 

ignorance  of  the  temporal 
information  of  the  data,  this  article  proposes  a  new  algorithm 
called MADDPG-LSTMactor, which combines MADDPG with 
Long short term memory (LSTM). By using agent’s observations 
of  continuous  timesteps  as  the  input  of  its  policy  network,  it 
allows the LSTM layer to process the hidden temporal message. 
Experiment’s result demonstrated that this algorithm had better 
performance in scenarios where the amount of agents is small. 
Besides, to solve MADDPG’s drawback of not being efficient in 
scenarios where agents are too many, this article puts forward a 
light-weight  MADDPG 
(MADDPG-L)  algorithm,  which 
simplifies the input of critic network. The result of experiments 
showed  that  this  algorithm  had  better  performance  than 
MADDPG when the amount of agents was large. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Intelligent agents have played important roles in daily life 
such as robots in factories or drones used in warfare. With the 
increased  complexity  of 
the  environment,  single-agent 
system’s performance become unsatisfying. Thus multi-agent 
system drew people’s attention with its multi-agent structure 
which  enables  it  to  finish  complicated  tasks  in  challenging 
environment by letting agents to communicate and cooperate 
with each other. Multi-agent system was applied in a range of 

to  navigation  and  obstacle  avoidance 

regions  like  traffic  regulation,  computer  games  and  robotic. 
The  ability 
is 
undoubtedly  the  essential  feature  of  agents  in  multi-agent 
system as the wide utilization of mobile multi-agent system in 
areas  like  autonomous  driving  cars  and  robots  in  the 
storehouse. 

At  present,  the  development  of  autonomous  navigation 
technology of agent system can be roughly divided into three 
directions according to the knowability of map data: method 
based on static path planning, method based on real-time map 
creation and positioning, and method based on reinforcement 
learning algorithm. 

The  navigation  algorithm  based  on  static  path  planning 
firstly models the mobile robot’s activity scene, establishes the 
global map of the scene, and stores the map data of the scene 
in the robot’s hardware device. The mainly used algorithms [4-
7]  are  probabilistic  roadmap  method  [1],  rapid-exploration 
random  tree  method [2] and artificial  potential field  method 
[3].  However,  the  navigation  algorithm  based  on  static  path 
planning can only be applied to  the  scene  where  the map is 
known. 

The technology of simultaneous localization and mapping 
(SLAM)  was  proposed  by  Smith  [8-9]  in  1986.  Many 
researchers  [10-11]  have  made  a  variety  of  optimization 
attempts  on  map  creation,  positioning  and  path  planning. 
However,  due  to  the  dynamic  changes  of  environment  and 
agents,  the  acquisition  of  sensor  data  that  slam  relies  on  is 
faced with uncertainty and complexity. 

As  the  obstacle  avoidance  ability  is  in  the  subset  of 
autonomous  navigation,  the  researches  done  in  autonomous 
navigation  also  included  exploration  in  obstacle  avoidance. 
However, the traditional route planning algorithms like A* [12] 
exhibited  problems  such  as  unable  to  adapt  to  dynamic 
environments  efficiently,  surging  time  complexity  with  the 
increase  of  agents.  With  the  development  made  in  deep 
learning, deep reinforcement learning was introduced in to the 
multi-agent  system.  Multi-agent  reinforcement 
learning 
became  a  solution  to  the  obstacle  avoidance  and  navigation 
problem. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
Preliminary  design of multi-agent reinforcement learning 
directly makes each agent run a single reinforcement learning 
algorithm. IQL [13] is an example, each agent in this algorithm 
executes  an  individual  Q-learning  [14]  algorithm.  Another 
example is IDDPG with each agent run an individual DDPG 
[15]  algorithm.  Because  agent  can’t  have  access  to  other 
agents’ action or observation, it can’t tell whether the change 
in environment is due to the action of other agents or just the 
environment’s 
the 
environment  ,  from  the  agent’s  perspective,  will  cause  the 
agent fail to  converge [15].  

stochasticity.  The 

instability 

in 

Multi-Agent  Deep  Deterministic  Policy  Gradient 
(MADDPG)  [16]  brought  forward  the  Centralised  Training 
and  Decentralized  Execution  (CTDE)  training  method  as 
agents can access other agents’ action and observation during 
training  phase,  even  the  global  observation  of  the  whole 
environment. The CTDE training fashion can enable agent to 
comprehend 
the  environment  even  with  other  agents’ 
exploration to ensure the stability of the training process and 
leads to a higher performance. However, it’s still not perfect 
as centralized training requires each agent to consider others’ 
action  and  observation  in  the  training  period,  so  when  the 
number of agents  increased  the  joint  action  space will grow 
exponentially.  To solve this problem, Value Decomposition 
Network (VDN) [17] adds all agents’ local critic’s output to 
gain the global action-value and QMIX [18] passes all agents’ 
local action-value to the mixer network to estimate the value 
of  the  joint  action  of  all  agents.  As  Q-learning,  the  basic 
reinforcement learning algorithm of QMIX is only for discrete 
Factorized  Multi-agent  Actor-
action 
Critic(FACMAC)  [19]  was  put  forward  as  a  subsidy  for 
continuous action space.  

space, 

and 

As  in  the  agent  navigation  and  obstacle  avoidance  task, 
each agent’s observation and action follows a continuous time 
series  pattern,  Long  Short-Term  Memory(LSTM)  [20]  and 
transformer [21] can be utilized in the reinforcement learning 
process  to increase performance  and  stability.   However,  its 
application  in  Multi-agent  reinforcement  learning  area  still 
await exploration.  

In this work, we propose two algorithms, viz., MADDPG-
LSTMactor and MADDPG-L to solve the obstacle avoidance 
and  navigation  problem  for  multi-agent  systems,  especially 
focusing  on  whether  the  process  of  time  series  can  improve 
algorithm’s performance and how to enable the algorithm to 
scale to larger amount of agents. The training and execution of 
the  algorithms  and  the  underlying  algorithms:  IDDPG, 
MADDPG, FACMAC, were together tested in several virtual 
environments.  The  results  suggest  that  the  MADDPG-
LSTMactor  algorithm  performs  better  than  the  underlying 
MADDPG  as  well  as  other  baseline  algorithms.  When  the 
number  of  agents  increases,  the  MADDPG-L  algorithm 
demonstrates the best performance. Therefore,  the proposed 
algorithms  can  be  used  as  a  basic  algorithm  for  multi-agent 
obstacle avoidance navigation tasks in the future.  

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the 
preliminaries for later use; In Section 3, we introduce the idea 
of 
the  algorithms  LSTM-MADDPG  and  MADDPG-L; 
Section  4  discusses  the  experimental  environment  and  the 
comparative  analysis  of  the  experimental  results;  Section  5 

summarizes the paper with possible research directions in the 
future. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

A.  DDPG 

In Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG), the deterministic 
policy 𝜇 will  output  a  certain  action 𝑢 in  given  state 𝑠, 𝑢 =
𝜇𝜃(𝑠) in  contrary  to  the  Stochastic  policy  which  gives  the 
probability of different actions. This simplifies the calculation 
of policy gradient by only executing integration on state rather 
than both on state and action. The policy gradient is calculated 
in the way shown in Equation (1). 

∇𝜃𝐽(𝜃) = 𝔼𝑠~𝒟[∇𝜃𝜇𝜃(𝑢|𝑠)∇𝑢𝑄𝜇(𝑠, 𝑢)|𝑢=𝜇𝜃(𝑠)] 
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [11] adapts 
neural  network  to  serve  as  the  policy  network  𝜇  and 
evaluation function 𝑄𝜇. And IDDPG is the simple extension 
of  the  DDPG  in  the  multi-agent  field  by  executing  an 
independent DDPG algorithm on each agent. 

(1) 

B.  MADDPG 

MADDPG is one of the classic algorithms for multi-agent 
reinforcement  learning.  It  adopts  the  training  method  of 
Centralized  Training  Distribution  Execution  (CTDE)  and 
extends the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [22] 
algorithm to the multi-agent domain. It uses offline learning to 
train  agents  that  perform  actions  within  a  continuous  action 
space. In the MADDPG algorithm, each agent will be trained 
the 
with 
deterministic  policy  network  𝜇𝑎  and  the  action  evaluation 
function 𝑄𝜇𝑎 exclusive to the agent 𝑎, respectively. Since each 
agent's  policy  and action evaluation  function  belong  only to 
the agent itself, this makes it applicable to totally competitive, 
totally-cooperative or mixed-setting environments. 

the  basic  structure  of  actor-critic, 

learning 

𝑛

In  this  article,  agent  a’s  policy  network  𝜇𝑎  will  be 
parameterized by 𝜃𝑎,that is 𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎; 𝜃𝑎).The joint policy of all 
  。 Each 
agents  will  be  noted  as  𝝁 ， 𝝁 = {𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎; 𝜃𝑎)}𝑎=1
agent’s  critic  network  is  noted  as  𝑄𝜇𝑎  ， with  𝜙𝑎  as  its 
parameters. The critic network will evaluate agent a’s action 
by the state s of the environment and the joint action u  of all 
agents, which is 𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠, 𝑢1, 𝑢2 … 𝑢𝑛; 𝜙𝑎)。The critic network 
of  agents  𝑄𝜇𝑎  will  be  trained  in  time  differential  fashion, 
aiming to minimize loss  ℒ(𝜙𝑎)，as in Equation (2)： 
2

𝐿(ϕa) = 𝐸𝐷 [(𝑦𝑎 − 𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠, 𝑢1, 𝑢2 … 𝑢𝑛; 𝜙𝑎))

(2) 

] 

Where   𝑦𝑎 = 𝑟𝑎 + 𝛾𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠′, 𝑢1

′ , 𝑢2

′ … 𝑢𝑛

′ |𝑢𝑎

′ =𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎;𝜃𝑎

−); 𝜙𝑎

−)。 

′ , 𝑢2

𝑟𝑎 is  the  reward  gained  by  agent  𝑎 ’s  interaction  with  the 
− is the parameter of target critic network，
environment，𝜙𝑎
′ ) represent the target action of all agents chosen 
′ , … 𝑢𝑛
(𝑢1
− 。 The 
by  their  target  policy  network  with  parameter  𝜃𝑎
experience 
is 
in 
stored 
tuple 
(𝑠, 𝑠′, 𝑢1, 𝑢2, … 𝑢𝑛, 𝑟1, 𝑟2, … 𝑟𝑛)。 

buffer  𝒟 

replay 

The  policy  gradient  J(μa)  of  agent  𝑎  is  calculated  in 

Equation (3). 

∇𝜃𝑎𝐽(𝜇𝑎) = 𝔼𝒟[∇𝜃𝑎𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎)∇𝑢𝑎𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠, 𝑢1, 𝑢2, … 𝑢𝑛 )|𝑢𝑎=𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎)]  (3) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
It needs to be mentioned that except the action of agent a 
trained  currently,  which  is  computed  by  agent  a’s  policy 
network, other agents’ action is just the corresponding action 
stored in replay buffer. 

C.  VDN and QMIX 

Both  Value  Decomposition  Network 

(VDN)  and 
Monotonic  Q-Value  Decomposition  Network  (QMIX)  are 
multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms that are trained 
using  centralized 
training  distribution  execution.  Both 
algorithm  tasks  are  to  train  a  centralized  critic.  Unlike  the 
MADDPG  algorithm,  the  environment  action  evaluation 
function they train will have only one output that evaluates the 
𝜋 .  This  environmental 
global  action-state  value,  which  is 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
action evaluation function, which evaluates the global action-
state value, will be calculated in a decomposed fashion. The 
practice of the value decomposition network (VDN) is to add 
the environmental action evaluation functions of each agent, 
as shown in Equation (4): 

𝝅 (𝝉, 𝒖; 𝜙) = ∑

𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑛
𝑎=1

𝜋𝑎(𝜏𝑎, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜙𝑎)

𝑄𝑎

(4) 

It should be noted that the environmental action evaluation 
𝜋𝑎   of each agent is only evaluated according to the 
function 𝑄𝑎
local observation record and the action of the agent 𝑎, unlike 
the  counterparts  in  MADDPG  which  consider  the  overall 
environment state and the actions of all other agents. 

The monotonic Q-value decomposition network (QMIX) 
uses a monotonic continuous mixing function to calculate the 
𝜋 ,  as  shown  in 
global  action-state  evaluation  function  𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
Equation (5): 

𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝝅 (𝝉, 𝒖, 𝒔; 𝜙, 𝜓) = 𝑓𝜓 (𝑠, 𝑄1

𝜋1(𝜏1, 𝑢1; 𝜙1), 𝑄2

𝜋2(𝜏2, 𝑢2; 𝜙2) … 𝑄𝑛

𝜋𝑛(𝜏𝑛, 𝑢𝑛; 𝜙𝑛))  (5) 

The  requirement  for  the  monotonicity  of  the  mixing 
function  is  to  ensure  that  when  the  global  action-state 
𝜋   is the largest, the actions selected by 
evaluation function 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝜋𝑎 
each agent are the same as those selected when the agent 𝑄𝑎
is maximized to facilitate distribution. In practical tasks, the 
mixing  function  in  QMIX  is  a  neural  network,  which 
guarantees monotonicity by using non-negative weights. The 
monotonic  QMIX  algorithm  still  uses  the  time  differential 
algorithm  for  training  with  the  target  network,  and  find  the 
optimal  solution  by  reducing  the  loss  function  𝐿(𝜙, 𝜓),  as 
shown in Equation (6): 

𝐿(𝝓, 𝜓) = 𝐸𝐷 [(𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 − 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝜋 (𝝉, 𝒖, 𝑠; 𝝓, 𝜓))

2

] 

(6) 

As  MADDPG  trains  the  centralized  action  evaluation 
𝜇  in CTDE method, that is, to learn a centralized 
network 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
critic for each agent a to evaluate the overall environment and 
𝜇𝑎 becomes 
all agent actions. The action evaluation network 𝑄𝑎
more  difficult to optimize  as  the number of agents increase 
and  action  space  surge.  Because  with  the  increase  of  the 
number  of  agents  and  the  action  space  of  each  agent  in  the 
multi-agent  system,  the  dimension  of  the  input  vector 
(𝑠, 𝑢1, 𝑢2. . . 𝑢𝑛)  of  the  environmental  action  evaluation 
𝜇𝑎    of  each  agent  will  increase  exponentially. 
network  𝑄𝑎
Therefore,  the  Factorized  Multi-Agent  Centralized  Policy 
Gradient  Algorithm  (FACMAC)  proposes  the  use  of  value 
factorisation 
centralized 
𝜇  that is easier to 
environmental action evaluation function 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
cope  with  the  increase  in  the  number  of  agents  and  the 
increase in the action space.  

construct 

train 

and 

to 

a 

Since FACMAC adopts the Actor-Critic structure as the 
basic algorithm framework, each agent 𝑎 relys on the unique 
action 𝑢𝑎 calculated by its policy network 𝜇𝑎 according to the 
local  action  observation  history  𝜏𝑎  when  making  action 
selection. Unlike  VDN and QMIX, agent only depends on the 
𝜇  to 
action  value  given by  the  action  evaluation  function 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
choose action. This means when constructing the factored and 
𝜇
centralized  critic  𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
impose 
there 
monotonicity  restrictions  on  the  mixing  function.  This 
enables  the  FACMAC  to  more  freely  decompose  the 
𝜇    
centralized  environmental  action  evaluation  function  𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
without  considering  its  possible  performance  loss,  so  as  to 
better deal with more complex surroundings. 

is  no  need 

to 

, 

The  centralized  action-value  evaluation  function  of 

FACMAC is shown in Equation (7): 

𝝁 (𝝉, 𝒖, 𝑠; 𝝓, 𝜓) = 𝑔𝜓 (𝑠, 𝑄1
𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝜇1(𝜏1, 𝑢1; 𝜙1), 𝑄2

𝜇2(𝜏2, 𝑢2; 𝜙2) … 𝑄𝑛

𝜇𝑛(𝜏𝑛, 𝑢𝑛; 𝜙𝑛))  (7) 

𝝓  and  𝜙𝑎    represent  the  parameters  of  the  centralized 
𝜇   and the local environmental 
action evaluation function 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝜇𝑎 of each agent a, respectively. 
action evaluation function 𝑄𝑎
𝑔𝜓 is a nonlinear mixing function, which is not restricted by 
monotonicity, and the parameter is 𝜓. The learning method is 
the same as the QMIX, the target network is used to learn the 
centralized  action  evaluation  function.  The  loss  function  is 
expressed in Equation (8): 

𝐿(𝝓, 𝜓) = 𝐸𝐷 [(𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 − 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝜇 (𝝉, 𝒖, 𝑠; 𝝓, 𝜓))

2

] 

(8) 

Where 𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 is: 

Where 𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 is: 

𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑟 + 𝛾 max
𝑢′

𝝅 (𝝉′, 𝒖′, 𝑠′; 𝝓−, 𝜓−)  

𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝝓−   is  the  set  of network parameters for the  target critic 
network of  each agent,  and 𝜓− is  the  target mixing network 
parameter. 

D.  FACMAC 

Since VDN and QMIX adopt the basic idea of Q-learning, 
these  two  algorithms  are  only  suitable  for  discrete  action 
spaces. The factored multi-agent centralized policy gradient 
algorithm (FACtored Multi-Agent centralized policy gradient, 
FACMAC)  can  be  used 
to  deal  with  multi-agent 
reinforcement learning tasks in continuous action spaces. 

𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑟 + 𝛾𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝝁 (𝝉′, 𝝁(𝝉′; 𝜽−), 𝑠′; 𝝓−, 𝜓−) 

In  the  calculation  of  the  policy  gradient,  FACMAC 
proposes a calculation method that computes the centralised 
policy gradient as in Equation (9). 

∇𝜃𝐽(𝝁) = 𝔼𝒟[∇𝜃𝝁∇𝝁𝑸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝝁 (𝜏, 𝜇1(𝜏1), 𝜇2(𝜏2) … 𝜇𝑛(𝜏𝑛), 𝑠)] (9) 

Different  from  the  gradient  calculation  method  of 
MADDPG shown in Equation (2), in FACMAC, all agents’ 
actions 𝑢𝑎  are  calculated  by  the  policy  network 𝜇𝑎  of  each 
agent 𝑎 according to its local action observation history 𝜏𝑎 . 
While in MADDPG, only the action of the currently trained 
agent is calculated in the above way, other agents’ action are 
sampled from the replay buffer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  THE DESIGN OF ALGORITHMS 

A.  MADDPG-LSTMactor 

In  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning  tasks,  agents 
interact with the environment using their own policies. Then 
they gain rewards resulting from their actions’ influence on 
the environment. In this learning process, each agent’s actions 
and observations as well as the states of the environment all 
demonstrate  the  features  like  time  series.  Due  to  LSTM’s 
capability of dealing with time series data, we introduce this  

structure  into  MADDPG  (which  has  been  proved  to  be  a 
successful  algorithm  in  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning 
field) to see whether the performance in multi-agent obstacle 
avoidance and navigation tasks can be further enhanced. 

As  MADDPG  algorithm  adopts  the  CTDE  (centralized 
training and Decentralized execution) training method, each 
agent’s critic network estimates the action 𝑢𝑎 made by actor 
network based on the environment’s state 𝑠 to guide the actor 
in training phase, whereas the actor network generates action 
both  in  training  and  execution  phase  using  its  observation 
history  as  input.  So ，it  is  obvious  that  comparing  to  the 
centralized critic network, the actor network deals with time 
series  data  more  frequently  and  directly.  Thus,  we  tried  to 
introduce LSTM in the actor network directly first. 

𝒏

Normally, agents in MADDPG algorithm interact with the 
environment  without  training  until  there’s  enough  data  in 
replay buffer 𝒟. Then, at each time step, a batch of experience 
tuples  containing  environment  state    ,  action 𝒖 ≡ {𝑢𝑎}𝑎=1
, 
reward 𝒓 ≡ {𝑟𝑎}𝒂=𝟏
 will be sampled from the replay buffer 𝒟 
to  train  the  critic  network  and  the  actor  network.  After  the 
training  phase,  the  updated  actor  network  will  continue  to 
interact  with  the  environment  to  generate  new  data.  The 
environment  will  be  reset  periodically  when  the  timestep 
becomes  an  integral  multiple  of  preset  hyper-parameter 
𝑒𝑝𝑖𝑠𝑜𝑑𝑒 − 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ. However, such training process is unable 
to exploit the information hidden in the time series. 

𝑛

In  this  article,  agents’  policy  network  equipped  with 
LSTM takes action 𝑢𝑎 on timestep 𝑡 based on a sequence of 
its  local  observation  𝝉𝒂 ≡ {𝜏𝑎
 rather  than  simply  the 
𝑡  of timestep 𝑡. We set the sequence length as a 
observation 𝜏𝑎
hyper-parameter 𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ = 𝑙 .  The  action-taking 
process of agent 𝑎 can be defined as Equation (10). 

𝑙
𝑡−𝑖}𝑖=0

𝑢𝑎 = 𝜇𝑎({𝜏𝑎

𝑙
𝑡−𝑖}𝑖=0

, ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑐𝑡−1; 𝜃𝑎) 

 (10) 

Figure 1.   The illustration of MADDPG-LSTMactor 

and execution phase. The queue stores experience tuples and 
is  named  as  sequence  buffer ℬ.  At  each  timestep,  the  actor 
network  takes  action 𝑢𝑎 based  on  the  observation  sequence 
stored  in  sequence  buffer  ℬ  and  gains  reward  𝑟𝑎 .  The 
experience  tuple  including  environment  state 𝑠,  all  agents’ 
observation 𝝉, all agents’ action 𝒖 and reward 𝒓 will be stored 
into the sequence buffer. If the sequence buffer is full, the first 
experience tuple will be deleted and the newest one will be 
stored at the end of the queue. Meantime, the whole sequence 
buffer will be stored into the replay buffer 𝒟 as an element. 
The sequence buffer will be emptied when the environment is 
reset. During training, instead of sampling experience tuples, 
the previously stored sequence buffer, which is a continuous 
sequence  of  experience  tuples,  will  be  sampled.  The 
illustration figure is shown below. 

In  MADDPG-LSTMactor  algorithm,  the  structure  of 
critic  network  and  how  it  works  are  same  to  the  one  in 
MADDPG. Thus, the way to optimize critic network and actor 
network remains unchanged. 

B.  MADDPG-L 

As  a  typical  MARL  algorithm  adopts  CTDE  training 
method,  MADDPG  requires  agents’  critic  network  to 
consider  every  agent’s  observation  and  action  in  training 
phase to stabilize training as well as improve the algorithm’s 
performance.  However,  such  demand  for  extra  information 
can  be  a  problem  when  the  amount  of  agents  in  the  multi-
agent system is too large, as it will lead to the explosion of 
action  space.  FACMAC  can  be  a  great  solution  to  this 
question.  By  learning  a  single  centralized  but  factor  critic, 
which  factors  the  joint  action-value  function 𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡  into  per-
agent utilities 𝑄𝑎 that are combined via a non-linear function. 
Each  factored  action-value  utility,  i.e.,  each  agent’s  local 
critic network estimates the value of its action, which can be 
written as 𝑄𝑎(𝜏𝑎, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜙𝑎) . 𝜏𝑎 is the local observation of agent 
𝑎 , 𝑢𝑎 is  its  action  and 𝜙𝑎 stands  for  the  parameters  of  the 
critic  network.  Then  the  mixing  function  𝑔𝜓  will  take  all 
agents’ critic network’s output and the environment’s state 𝑠 
to give the final joint action-value estimation for all agents. In 
this way, agent’s local critic network only needs to calculate 
its own action and observation, regardless of the number of 
agents in the system. The mixing function helps to ensure that 
during  training  phase,  all  agents  can  get  information  about 
other agents and the environment.  

However,  algorithms  factoring  the  centralized  critic  are 
not perfect. In the baseline test of MPE (Multi-agent Particle 
Environment)  [23],  the  QMIX  algorithm  demonstrated  the 
problem that it’s hard to get away from the initial state. The 
result is shown in Fig. 2. 

The horizontal axis is the timestep of training, while the 
vertical axis is the average return of the algorithm. It can be 
witnessed  that  the  performance,  which  is  indicated  by  its 
average return, doesn’t make any practical improvement until 
the training timestep is more than 3 million. In this article’s 
experiment,  the  FACMAC  algorithm  showed  the  same 
problem  because  the  structure  design  and  the  idea  of 
FACMAC are similar to QMIX. The result can be found in 
chapter 4. 

We realized this mechanism by creating and maintaining 
a queue with the length of 𝑠𝑒𝑞 − 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ during both training 

We suggest that this problem could happen because there 
are too many networks to optimize in the training procedure. 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   The performance of QMIX in MPE 

to  MADDPG, 

As the centralized and final critic of FACMAC is created by 
the  mixing function which mix the combination of all local 
critics, we  need to optimize  all of them while training each 
it  only  requires 
agent.  In  comparison 
optimizing the agent’s own critic when it’s the agent’s turn to 
be trained. So, it’s harder for the FACMAC algorithm to make 
solid  progress  and  this  could lead  to  the  cold  start  problem 
which worsen the situation. Because the algorithm is still in 
the  primitive  stage,  most  of  its  attempts  can’t  bring  any 
positive  rewards,  so  its  replay  buffer  is  flooded  with  ‘not 
successful’ experience tuples for the training phase to sample. 
The  reason  why  we  made  such  suggestion  comes  from  the 
way to calculate centralized critic in the experiment. When we 
are  training  an  agent,  we  need  to  calculate  the  centralized 
critic, as the actor network need it to carry out gradient ascend. 
As  the  centralized  critic  requires  other  agents’  critic  result 
besides the agent 𝑎 which is currently trained, we can directly 
use  other  agents’  critic  to  estimate  the  action-value  of  their 
own actions or use the critic network of agent 𝑎 to simulate 
other agents’ critic network to produce the action-value. As in 
our  experiment,  all  agents’  critic  networks  share  the  same 
structure, which makes the simulation method possible. The 
advantage of using only the critic network of agent 𝑎 is it can 
reduce the amount of networks to improve, which presumably 
makes  training  easier.  In  our  experiment,  such  method  did 
improve  the  performance.  However,  the  progress  is  still  far 
from satisfaction. 

In this article, we bring forward a light-weight MADDPG 
algorithm, which can better scale to larger amount of agents, 
we named it as MADDPG-L. The actor network remains the 
same  as  MADDPG,  we  set  the  policy  of  agent  𝑎  to  be 
𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎; 𝜃𝑎), and the action of agent 𝑎 to be 𝑢𝑎 = 𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎, 𝜃𝑎). 
𝜃𝑎 is the parameter of 𝜇𝑎. What distinguish it from MADDPG 
is  the  critic  network  of  each  agent.  The  notation  of  it  is 
𝜇(𝑠, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜙𝑎),  implying  that  the  critic  of  each  agent  only 
𝑄𝑎
considers that action of its own instead of all agents’ action, 
𝜇. Meanwhile, the environment state 
𝜙𝑎 is the parameter of 𝑄𝑎
𝑠 helps the agent to get the global information it needs. This 
change helps to solve the problem of action space explosion 
as each agent only needs to calculate its own action regardless 
of  the  amount  of  agents  in  the  multi-agent  system.  The 
illustration is shown in Fig. 3. The critic network is trained in 
temporal difference style, the loss function of it is shown in 
Equation (11). 

2
ℒ(𝜙𝑎) = 𝔼𝒟 [(𝑦𝑎 − 𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜙𝑎))

] 

(11) 

Figure 3.   Illustration of MADDPG-L 

where 𝑦𝑎 is： 

𝑦𝑎 = 𝑟𝑎 + 𝛾𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠′, 𝑢𝑎

′ |𝑢𝑎

′ =𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎;𝜃𝑎

−); 𝜙𝑎

−) 

𝑟𝑎  is  the  reward  of  agent  𝑎 ’s  interaction  with  the 
− indicates the parameter of target network，
′  is the action implemented by the target actor network with 
−. The experience tuples stored in 
as 

environment, 𝜙𝑎
𝑢𝑎
its parameter notified as 𝜃𝑎
the 
(𝑠, 𝑠′, 𝑢1, 𝑢2, … 𝑢𝑛, 𝑟1, 𝑟2, … 𝑟𝑛). 

buffer  𝒟  has 

structure 

replay 

the 

The  policy  gradient  of  agent 𝑎’s  actor  network 𝐽(𝜇𝑎) is 

shown in Equation (12)： 

  ∇𝜃𝑎𝐽(𝜇𝑎) = 𝔼𝒟[∇𝜃𝑎𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎)∇𝑢𝑎𝑄𝜇𝑎(𝑠, 𝑢𝑎 )|𝑢𝑎=𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎)] (12) 

IV.  EXPERIMENT 

A.  Simulation environment 

The 

simulation  environment 

is  based  on  MPE 
environment, and the environmental parameters are listed in 
the Table 1. 

B.  The experiment scenarios and results 

The  experiment  scenarios  are  Obstacle  predator-prey, 
Spread,  Tunnel  and  Simple  Tunnel.  The  Obstacle 
Predator-Prey  acts  as  the  initial  test  environment  for  all 
algorithms  to  find  out  their  performance  in  obstacle-
avoidance  and  dynamic  target  pursuing  task.  The  Spread 
environment  aims  to  test  all  algorithms’  performance  in 
avoiding  obstacles  that  are  relatively  small  and  arriving  at 
designated  destinations.  What’s  more, 
the  Spread 
environment will have multiple versions including different 
number of agents to discover the algorithm’s ability to scale. 
The  Tunnel  environment  is  meant  for  testing  algorithm’s 
ability  in  navigating  through  environments  where  obstacles 
are so huge that they form the contour. In other words, there 
will  be  some  specific  routes  for  the  agents  to  take  and 
algorithms  should  learn  to  find  them.  The  Simple  Tunnel 
environment  is  merely  the  Tunnel  environment  with  some 
modifications to make it more realistic. Apart from the Simple 
Tunnel environment, the algorithms to be tested are IDDPG, 
MADDPG, 
MADDPG-L, 
MADDPG-LSTMactor, 
FACMAC.  In  the  Simple  Tunnel  environment,  agents’ 
rewards are not equal and thus FACMAC is not tested  as it 
requires such a condition.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.     EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT PARAMETERS 

Term 

CPU 

Memory Size 

GPU 

Version 

Intel i9 9900k 

64GB 

Colorful NVIDIA 
GTX1080(VRAM 8GB) 

Operation System 

Ubuntu 18.04 LTS 

GPU Driver version 

Python version 

Pytorch version 

CUDA version 

495.46 

3.8.13 

1.11.0 

11.5 

TABLE II.  HYPERPARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENT 

Figure 4.   Illustration of Obstacle Predator Prey environment 

Hyperparamters 

max-episode-len 

time-steps 

Num-adversaries 

Lr-actor 

Lr-critic 

Epsilon 

Noise-rate 

Gamma 

Batch-size 

seq-length 

Value 

100 

2000000 
1
（defaul
t） 
0.001
（defaul
t） 
0.01
（defaul
t） 

0.1 

0.1 

0.95 
256
（defaul
t） 
5
（defaul
t） 

Meaning 

The length of each episode 

Total interaction steps 

Other agents besides those get 
trained 

The learning rate of policy 
network 

The learning rate of critic 
network 

Parameter for 𝜖-𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑦 action 
choosing policy 
The rate of noise added to 
action during training phase 
Time elapse coefficient 

Batch-size for experience tuples 
sampled for training 

Figure 5.   Algorithms’ performance in Obstacle Predator Prey environment 

The length of continuous steps 
for LSTM training 

environment  state,  demonstrated  better  performance  than 
MADDPG in the final stage. 

The hyper-parameters used in the Experiment are listed in 
table  2,  some of  them  remain  the  same  in  all  environments 
and  algorithms,  others  which  vary  from  experiment  to 
experiment will have their default value listed here and exact 
value shown in appendix. 

Obstacle  Predator Prey: In the Obstacle Predator-Prey 
environment,  a  team  of  agents  will  be  trained  to  pursuit  an 
adversarial agent with higher speed. The agents trained need 
to learn how to chase the target(prey) while avoiding crashing 
into  obstacles  and  each  other.  The  illustration  of  the 
environment is Fig. 4. 

The result of the experiment is shown in Fig. 5. The result 
shows  that  algorithms  using  the  CTDE  training  paradigm 
generally have better performance than IDDPG, which adopts 
the decentralized training method. FACMAC is the exception, 
the  explanation  can  be  found  in  chapter  3.2.  In  this 
environment, with the help of LSTM, MADDPG-LSTMactor 
has better performance than MADDPG. MADDPG-L, which 
only feeds agents’ critics with the agent’s own action and the  

To  find  out  the  reason  why  FACMAC  performed  far 
worse than other algorithms, we did more experiments in this 
environment. 

The  first  additional  experiment  is  to  test  two  different 
ways of getting the final centralized critic. As the calculation 
of  it  requires  other  agents’  critic  result  besides  the  agent 𝑎 
which is currently trained, we can directly use other agents’ 
critic to estimate the action-value of their own actions, or use 
the critic network of agent a to simulate other agents’ critic 
network to produce the action-value. As in our experiment, all 
agents’  critic  networks  share  the  same  structure,  the 
simulation  method  is  possible.  The  result  of  these  two 
different  calculation  methods  of  the  centralized  critic  in 
FACMAC is shown in Fig. 6. 

It  can  be  witnessed  that  using  agent’s  critic  network  to 
simulate other agents’ critic networks can reach a better result 
than  directly  using  other  agents’  critic  network,  though  the 
performance is still not comparable to other algorithms. The 
mixing network could be the reason. As in the FACMAC’s  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive  data  for  training.  The  result  of  this  experiment  is 
shown in Fig. 7. 

Figure 8.   The illustration of Spread environment 

local  critic  network 

We set 1 million timestep to be the end of the first stage. 
The algorithm’s performance simply plunged to the level of 
random policy after reaching the watershed. We altered each 
𝜇(𝜏𝑎, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜃𝑎)  to 
agent’s 
𝜇(𝑠, 𝑢𝑎; 𝜃𝑎) and get rid of the mixing network. By doing this, 
𝑄𝑎
we created MADDPG-L. The input of the algorithm’s critic 
network doesn’t have the problem of the explosion of action 
space  as  it  only  requires  the  agent’s  own  action,  and  still 
provides global information.  

from  𝑄𝑎

Figure 6.   Performance of FACMAC with different parameter sharing 
policy 

Figure 7.   FACMAC’s performance by optimizing the critic networks and 
policy networks at the first stage, then training the mixer network 

design that the mixing network should be considered as a part 
of the critic network, the parameters of the mixing network 
will  also  be  updated  while  optimizing  the  critic  network, 
which brings uncertainty to the gradient’s direction. This can 
be proved in our second additional experiment. 

In  our  second  additional  experiment,  we  froze  the 
parameters of the mixing network and only optimized agents’ 
local critics in the first stage of training, thus the centralized 
critic was ablated. In the later stage, we started to update the 
mixing network’s parameters and switched back to the normal 
training  process  of  FACMAC.  The  way  to  determine  the 
policy  gradient  also  varied  in  two  stages,  Equation  (13) 
demonstrates how it’s done in the first stage and Equation (14) 
for the later stage. 

∇𝜃𝐽(𝜇𝑎) = 𝔼𝒟[∇𝜃𝜇𝑎∇𝜇𝑎𝑄𝑎
∇𝜃𝐽(𝝁) = 𝔼𝒟[∇𝜃𝝁∇𝝁𝑸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝝁(𝜏𝑎, 𝜇𝑎(𝜏𝑎); 𝜙𝑎)] 
𝝁 (𝜏, 𝜇1(𝜏1), 𝜇2(𝜏2) … 𝜇𝑛(𝜏𝑛), 𝑠)] 

(13) 

(14) 

By training agents’ local critic networks in advance, we 
aim  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  centralized  training. 
Meanwhile,  the  successful  experience  tuples  stored  in  the 
replay  buffer  assures  that  the  algorithm  can  have  enough 

Spread: In the Spread environment, target locations will 
be randomly generated after each environment reset, a team 
with  the  same  amount  of  the  target  locations  are  trained  to 
occupy  all  target  locations.  Obstacles  with  random  location 
will also be generated in the space. Agents learn to occupy all 
target locations while avoid collision with the obstacle or each 
other. The illustration of this environment is Fig. 8. 

Due to the different goal of training, the reward function 
in this environment is changed from the one in the Obstacle 
Predator-Prey. The reward function is set to be the negative 
distance sum of all target locations to their nearest agent. In 
other words, with each agent getting closer to the it’s target, 
the  reward  will  get  higher.  We  also  give  agents  negative 
rewards for having collisions with other agents or obstacles.  

In order to examine algorithms’ ability to scale to larger 
amount of agents, the Spread environment will have different 
versions  with  different  amount  of  agents,  Spread-3a  with  3 
agents, Spread-6a with 6 agents and Spread-9a with 9 agents. 
The 
these  3  environments’ 
in 
result  of  algorithms 
performance are shown in Fig. 9. 

From the result of experiments in those 3 environments, it 
can  be  seen  that  MADDPG-LSTMactor  will  perform better 
than MADDPG when the agents are relatively few. However, 
with  the  increase  of  agents,  MADDPG-LSTMactor  has  no 
advantage over MADDPG. This could because the increased 
complexity  brought  by  LSTM.  Although  MADDPG-L 
doesn’t perform any better than MADDPG when the amount 
of  agents  are  small,  it  demonstrates  significant  better 
performance than MADDPG as agents become more. It can 
be concluded that in this environment, MADDPG-L can scale 
to more agents better. 

Tunnel and Simple Tunnel: In the Tunnel environment, 
two massive obstacles will form a narrow tunnel which forces  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.   Algorithms’ performance in Spread environment with different amount of agents.

the  agents  to  plan  path  to  go  through.  𝑁  target  locations 
spread  at  one  end  of  the  tunnel  with  fixed  positions.  After 
every  environment  reset,  𝑁  agents  will  emerge  at  fixed 
positions at the other end of tunnel. They need to go through 
tunnel  and  occupy  every  target  location  while  avoid  any 
contact with each other or the obstacle. The illustration of the 
environment is shown in Fig. 10(left). 

Similar to the Spread environment, the reward function of 
the Tunnel environment is also set to be the negative sum of 
each  target  location  to  its  nearest  agent.  Agents  will  get 
penalized for collide with other agents or the obstacle. 

In order to simplify the environment as well as to be closer 
to  the  reality,  some  modifications  are  made  to  the  Tunnel 
environment.  We  set  walls  around  the  obstacle  to  limit  the 
agents’ mobility range. The same amount of agents and target 
locations  still  emerge  at  two  end  of  the  tunnel.  What’s 
different is that each agent is designated one target location of 
its own to occupy. Agents also need to avoid collisions while 
moving to the target locations. The modified environment is 
named as the Simple Tunnel environment with its illustration 
shown in Fig. 10 

The reward function is changed since agents in the Simple 
Tunnel environment have different goal. Their rewards are no 
longer collaborative and shared. The reward function of agent 
𝑎  is  determined  by  its  distance  to  its  designated  target 
location.Penalties for collisions will also be given. Since each 
agent’s  reward  function  are  not  the  same,  FACMAC  is  not 
applicable in this environment.  

The experiment results are shown in Fig. 11. From the test 
result,  MADDPG-LSTMactor  maintains  its  advantage  over 
MADDPG when the number of agents is small. In the Simple 
Tunnel environment where is closer to reality, MADDPG- 

Figure 10.  The illustration of Tunnel environment (left) and Simple Tunnel 
environment (right) 

LSTMactor  does  not  only  demonstrate  better  performance, 
but  also  shows  faster  learning  speed.  While  MADDPG-L’s 
performance  has  no  edge  over  MADDPG’s,  MADDPG-L 
also has a faster convergence speed than MADDPG. 

After  the  experiment  done 

in  the  Simple  Tunnel 
environment, we increase the number of agents in the Simple 
Tunnel  environment  from  3  to  6  and  name  the  new 
environment  as  Simple  Tunnel  6a.  The  test  result  of 
algorithms in this environment is shown in Fig. 11(two on the 
right). The experiment demonstrated that MADDPG-L has a 
better  performance  than  MADDPG  with  the  increase  of 
agents  while  MADDPG-LSTMactor  lost  its  advantage  over 
MADDPG in term of performance.  

V.  CONCLUSION 

In 

this  paper,  we  proposed 

two  algorithms,  viz., 
two 
MADDPG-LSTMactor  and  MADDPG-L.  These 
IDDPG, 
algorithms  and 
MADDPG,    FACMAC  were  together  tested  in  several 
virtualenvironments to examine their ability to avoid obstacle 
and to cope with the increase in the number of agents. 

the  underlying  algorithms: 

Figure 11.  Algorithms’ performance in Tunnel environmen(first on the left))  and Algorithms’ performance in Simple Tunnel environment with 

different number of agents(two on the right) 

 
 
 
After  experiments,  this  paper  can  draw  a  preliminary 
conclusion:  when  the  number  of  agents  is  small,  the 
MADDPG-LSTMactor  algorithm  is  a  better  multi-agent 
obstacle  avoidance  navigation  algorithm  than  MADDPG. 
When  the  number  of  agents  increases,  the  MADDPG-L 
algorithm demonstrates better performance. 

The  algorithms  proposed  in  this  paper  exhibits  certain 
capabilities in virtual environments, and can be used as a basic 
in  the  future.  Of  course,  a  realistic  obstacle  avoidance 
algorithm  is  by  no  means  limited  to  using  reinforcement 
learning  as  the  only  solution  to  a  problem.  There  are  also 
promising solutions of multi-agent navigation based on other 
frameworks,  such  as  meta  learning  [24].  By  combining 
geolocation, computer vision, etc., better performance may be 
achieved.      Multi-agent  navigation  in  case  of  more  difficult 
scenarios, e.g., with limited communication power [25], is also 
well worth exploration. 

APPENDIX 

TABLE III.  

HYPERPARAMETERS IN OBSTACLE PREDATOR PREY 

ENVIRONMENT 

Hyperparameter 

Num-adversaries 

Lr-actor 

Lr-critic 

Batch-size 

seq-length 

Value 

1 

0.001 

0.01 

256 

3 

TABLE IV.   HYPERPARAMETERS IN SPREAD-3A ENVIRONMENT 

Hyperparameter 

Num-adversaries 

Lr-actor 

Lr-critic 

Batch-size 

seq-length 

Value 

0 

0.001 

0.01 

128 

5 

TABLE V.  

HYPERPARAMETERS IN SPREAD-6A AND SPREAD-9A 

ENVIRONMENT 

Hyperparameter 
Num-adversaries 
Lr-actor 
Lr-critic 
Batch-size 
seq-length 

Value 
0 
0.001 
0.01 
32 
3 

TABLE VII.   HYPERPARAMETERS IN SIMPLE TUNNEL-6A ENVIRONMENT 

Hyperparameter 

Num-adversaries 

Lr-actor 

Lr-critic 

Batch-size 

seq-length 

Value 

0 

0.001 

0.001 

32 

3 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation  of  China  under  grants  62172072,  61872101, 
61872055,  U1908214,  U21A20491, 
the  Fundamental 
Research  Funds  for  the  Central  Universities  under  grant 
DUT21JC18,  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  Liaoning 
Province of China under Grant 2021-MS-114. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Lavalle  S  M.  Rapidly-exploring  random  trees:  A  new  tool  for  path 

planning. Computer Science, 1998: 98. 

[2]  Kavraki L E, Svestka P, Latombe J C, et al. Probabilistic roadmaps for 
path  planning  in  high-dimensional  configuration  spaces.  IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics and Automation, 1996, 12(4): 566-580. 

[3]  Fakoor  M,  Kosari  A,  Jafarzadeh  M.  Revision  on  fuzzy  artificial 
potential  field  for  humanoid  robot  path  planning  in  unknown 
environment. International Journal of Advanced Mechatronic Systems, 
2015, 6(4): 174-183. 

[4]  Liu X, Wang Q, Xu S. Path planning based on improved  probabilistic 
roadmap  method.  Fire  Control  &  Command  Control,  2012, 
037(004):121-124. 

[5]  Yang  S,  Liu  Y,  Yang  W.  A  local  dynamic  probabilistic  roadmap 
method for unknown environment. Aeronautical Science & Technology, 
2016, 27(04):69-73. 

[6]  Liu C, Han J, An K. Dynamic path planning based on an improved RRT 

algorithm for roboCup robot. Robot, 2017, 39(01):8-15. 

[7]  Zhou F, Zhu Q, Zhao G. Path optimization of manipulator based on the 
tree  algorithm.  Journal  of 

improved  rapidly-exploring  random 
Mechanical Engineering, 2011, 47(11):30-35. 

[8]  Smith  R,  Self  M,  Cheeseman  P.  Estimating  uncertain  spatial 
relationships  in  robotics[M].  Autonomous  robot  vehicles.  Springer, 
New York, NY, 1990: 167-193. 

[9]  Smith  R  C,  Cheeseman  P.  On  the  representation  and  estimation  of 
spatial  uncertainty.  The  International  Journal  of  Robotics  Research, 
1986, 5(4): 56-68. 

[10] Zhang  M.  RGB-D  SLAM  algorithm  of  indoor  mobile  robot.  Harbin 

Institute of Technology, 2018. 

TABLE VI.   HYPERPARAMETERS IN TUNNEL AND SIMPLE TUNNEL 
ENVIRONMENT 

[11] Li X. Research on navigation technology of indoor mobile robot based 

on SLAM. Harbin Institute of Technology, 2018. 

Hyperparameter 

Num-adversaries 

Lr-actor 

Lr-critic 

Batch-size 

seq-length 

Value 

0 

0.001 

0.01 

128 

5 

[12] Dechter  R,  Pearl  J.  Generalized  best-first  search  strategies  and  the 

optimality of A. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 1985, 32(3): 505-536. 

[13] Tan  M.  Multi-Agent  Reinforcement  Learning:  Independent  vs. 

Cooperative Agents. Machine Learning Proceedings, 1993:330-337. 

[14] Watkins C J C H, Dayan P. Q-learning[J]. Machine learning, 1992, 8(3): 

279-292. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[15] de Witt C S, Gupta T, Makoviichuk D, et al. Is independent learning all 
you  need  in  the  starcraft  multi-agent  challenge?.  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:2011.09533, 2020. 

[16] Lowe  R,  Wu  Y,  Tamar  A,  et  al.  Multi-agent  actor-critic  for  mixed 
cooperative-competitive  environments.International  Conference  on 
Neural Information Processing Systems, Long Beach, 2017: 6382-6393. 

[17] Sunehag P, Lever G, Gruslys A, et al. Value-decomposition networks 
for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 
2017. 

[18] Rashid T, Samvelyan M, Schroeder C, et al. Qmix: Monotonic value 
function 
reinforcement 
learning.International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning,  Stockholm, 
2018: 4295-4304. 

deep  multi-agent 

factorisation 

for 

[19] Peng  B, Rashid  T, de  Witt C  A  S, et  al.  FACMAC:  Factored Multi-
Agent  Centralised  Policy  Gradients.Neural  Information  Processing 
Systems, Online, 2021: 12208-12221. 

[20] Naveed K B, Qiao Z, Dolan J M. Trajectory Planning for Autonomous 
Vehicles  Using  Hierarchical  Reinforcement  Learning[C].2021  IEEE 
International  Intelligent  Transportation  Systems  Conference  (ITSC), 
Indianapolis, 2021: 601-606. 

[21] Parisotto  E,  Song  F,  Rae  J,  et  al.  Stabilizing  transformers  for 
learning[C].International  Conference  on  Machine 

reinforcement 
Learning, Online, 2020: 7487-7498. 

[22] Sutton R S, McAllester D, Singh S, et al. Policy gradient methods for 
reinforcement  learning  with  function  approximation[J].  Advances  in 
neural information processing systems, 1999, 12:1-7. 

[23] Opendilab,Dl-engine-docs[OL].https://di-engine- 

docs.readthedocs.io/zh_CN/latest/env_tutorial/multiagent_particle_zh.
html 

[24] Salar  A,  Mo  C,  Mehran  M,  et  al.  Toward  Observation  Based  Least 
Restrictive  Collision  Avoidance  Using  Deep  Meta  Reinforcement 
Learning. IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett. 2021, 6(4): 7445-7452. 

[25] Yuanzhao Z, Bo D, Xuan L, et al. Decentralized Multi-Robot Collision 
Avoidance  in  Complex  Scenarios  With  Selective  Communication. 
IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett. 2021, 6(4): 8379-8386. 

 
 
 
 
