A General Auxiliary Controller for Multi-agent Flocking

Jinfan Zhou, Jiyu Cheng, Lin Zhang, and Wei Zhang

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
1
1

]

A
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
3
2
0
6
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— We aim to improve the performance of multi-agent
ﬂocking behavior by quantifying the structural signiﬁcance
of each agent. We designed a conﬁdence score(ConfScore) to
measure the spatial signiﬁcance of each agent. The score will
be used by an auxiliary controller to reﬁne the velocity of
agents. The agents will be enforced to follow the motion of
the leader agents whose ConfScores are high. We demonstrate
the efﬁcacy of
to
several existing algorithms including learning-based and non-
learning-based methods. Furthermore, we examined how the
auxiliary controller can help improve the performance under
different settings of communication radius, number of agents
and maximum initial velocity.

the auxiliary controller by applying it

I. INTRODUCTION

Multiple collaborative agents can form large scale swarms
which have wide application in various ﬁelds including
assisting public safety communications [11], environment
mapping and exploration [13, 2], and cooperative hunting [3].
A centralized controller is capable of handling these prob-
lems when the scale of the swarm is moderate, while it
fails as the scale becomes much larger. Thus, a decentralized
method is an appropriate solution to deal with this situation.
In a decentralized system, each agent makes its own decision
based on the local information it collects by itself and the
information shared by its neighbours.

Flocking is a task to coordinate the motion of several
autonomous agents which is closely related to the natural
animal behaviours [25, 10]. The early research in ecology
and biology [1, 26, 12] has inspired the multi-agent ﬂocking
research. A computer animation program [14] mimicking
the animal aggregation behaviour was proposed and paved
the path for several following work leading to the creation
of a new research area called artiﬁcial
life in computer
graphics [20]. Flocking is also an important problem in
control and robotics [22], and has many practical applications
especially in the control of UAVs [23, 17, 5]

Some previous work uses machine learning methods like
imitation learning [9, 15, 16] and reinforcement learning [7]

Jinfan Zhou, Jiyu Cheng, Lin Zhang are with the School of Control
Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, China
(e-mail:zjf@mail.sdu.edu.cn;
jycheng@sdu.edu.cn;
zl935546110@gmail.com).

Wei Zhang is with the School of Control Science and Engineering,
Shandong University, Jinan 250061, China, and also with the Institute
of Brain and Brain-Inspired Science, Shandong University, Jinan 250061,
China (e-mail:davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn).

This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Project of New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence of China
under Grant 2018AAA0102504 ; in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant U1913204, and Grant 61991411; and in
part by the Shandong Major Scientiﬁc and Technological Innovation Project
(MSTIP) under Grant 2019JZZY010428 and in part by the Fundamental
Research Funds of Shandong University under Grant 31400061340342.

which require a lot of time to train the controller. While other
methods like [18, 14, 6, 19] require no training but will be
very difﬁcult to ﬁnd an optimal controller in a distributed
setting.

As proposed in [21], graph neural networks [4, 27, 8]
are suited for the decentralized control system where com-
munication is limited and agents can only share information
with their nearby peers. Aggregation graph neural networks
are useful when dealing with information sharing, but it
aggregates information only depending on the adjacency
relationship and ignores the signiﬁcance of it. Veliˇckovi´c et
al. [24] combined attention mechanism with graph neural
networks but they only considered point-to-point attention
and did not use the information provided by neighbours to
measure each agent’s structural signiﬁcance in a point-to-
group manner. Moreover, such proposed attention can only
be used in a learning-based method, which means that it
needs extra time to train the network.

In order to address these issues, we introduce the Con-
fScore to comprehensively measure the quality of each
agent’s position and the consistency of its motion with
neighbours. We also propose an auxiliary controller based
on the ConfScore for better coordination. We examine the
dynamic structural importance of each agent and enforce the
agents to follow those opinion leaders in a swarm. It proves
to be beneﬁcial to a wide variety of algorithms and requires
no extra training. The whole procedure is illustrated as in
Fig. 1.

II. CONTROL OF MULTI-AGENT SWARM

We consider there are N agents in a swarm involved in
some dynamic process which requires to be controlled. The
process can be characterized by some state value xxxi(t) ∈ Rp
which demonstrates the states including position, velocity
and acceleration of each agent in time t. Also, some control
action uuui(t) ∈ Rq is also needed so as to illustrate the action
that agents take so as to realize the goal of controlling the
whole system. We denote matrix xxx(t) = [xxxT
N (t)] ∈
RN ×p as a collection of the states of all of the agents in a
N (t)] ∈ RN ×q as
swarm and the matrix uuu(t) = [uuuT
a collection of the control action of the system in time t.
The evolution of the dynamic process can be formulated as
a differential equation: ˙xxx(t) = f (xxx(t), uuu(t)).

1 (t); ...; uuuT

1 (t); ...; xxxT

Our controller operates in discrete time with a sampling
time TS and the index n. During one sampling time, the
control action uuu(n) is kept the same from time nTs until
(n + 1)Ts. As the state value matrix xxxn = xxx(nTs), we can
accumulate ˙xxx(t) from time nTs to (n + 1)Ts and give a
formulation of the discrete dynamic system as:

 
 
 
 
 
 
ConfScore-based auxiliary controller. (a)A centralized/decentralized controller Φ takes state value xxx as input and output control action uuu.
Fig. 1.
(b)ConfScores are calculated according to the state value xxx. (c)Based on the ConfScores, we calculate the assistant acceleration ¯u¯u¯u to adjust the agents’
motion.

xxxn+1 =

(cid:90) (n+1)Tx

nTs

f (xxx(t), uuu(t))dt + xxxn

(1)

Based on different tasks we are dealing with, we have
different cost function l(xxx(t), uuu(t)). So at each time step nTs,
we have an immediate cost ln = l(xxx(n), uuu(n)). The objective
of the control policy is to minimize the accumulative cost
(cid:80)∞

n=0 ln.
We use a graph G to denote an agent network and use
nnn to represent the collection of all the agents. we deﬁne a
communication radius R . If the distance between two agents
nnni and nnnjare within R , then we add an edge (i, j) ∈ En
to the graph and nnni and nnnj are treated as neighbours. Thus
we can deﬁne the neighbourhood of nnni at time n as Nij =
{j : (i, j) ∈ En}.

III. CONFSCORE-BASED AUXILIARY CONTROLLER

As different agents take different positions in a swarm,
they intrinsically have different structural signiﬁcance. We
ﬁrst propose a ConfScore to comprehensively measure the
structural importance as well as the motion quality of an
agent in the swarm. We evaluate it based on two criteria (1)
the number of the neighbours and (2) to which extent its
velocity is in accordance with its neighbours. Criterion (1)
measures the goodness of an agent’s position and criterion
(2) is used to decide an agent’s motion quality. Thus we
propose a ConfScore Ci to measure the extent to which one
agent should be conﬁdent about its current motion.

Ci =

(cid:88)

j∈Ni

vi · vj
||vi|| · ||vj||

(2)

One agent would have higher score if it has more neigh-

bours sharing similar velocity with it and vice versa.

After the computation of the ConfScores, every agent is
assigned with one score. The score can be interpreted as
how conﬁdent an agent should stick to its current motion
or change its velocity in order to follow other agents who
are more likely to be on the right track. Then we utilize

Algorithm 1 Computation of Assistant Acceleration Based
on ConfScore
Require: nnn: collection of agents; NNN : collection of neigh-
bourhood of all agents; vvv: collection of velocity of all
agents; λ: a heuristic magnitude coefﬁcient

Ensure: ccc: collection of ConfScores of all agents ¯uuu: collec-

tion of assistant acceleration of all agents

for each neighbour nnnj in nnni’s neighbourhood Ni do

vnnni ·vnnnj
||vnnni ||·||vnnnj ||

1: Initialize ccc, ¯uuu to be 000
2: for each agent nnni in nnn do
3:

4:

cnnni = cnnni +

end for

5:
6: end for
7: for each agent nnni in nnn do
8:
9:
10:

counter = 0
for each neighbour nnnj in nnni’s neighbourhood Ni do
is among nnnj’s top-k

if cnnnj > cnnni and nnnj
neighbours with regard to ccc then

¯uuunnni = ¯uuunnni + λ(Cm − Ci)(vnnnjvnnnjvnnnj − vnnnivnnnivnnni)
counter+ = 1

11:

end if

12:
13:
14:
15:
16: end for
17: return ccc, ¯uuu

end for
¯uuunnni =

¯uuunnni
counter

ConfScores to compute assistant acceleration as in Algorithm
1.

λ is a coefﬁcient used to determine the extent to which we
wish the agent to follow its leaders. It is set heuristically to
be number of agents 30
NNN for a non-learning-based algorithm
and 15

NNN for a learning-based algorithm.

The scalar difference (Cm −Ci) shows the extent to which
the agent is enforced to follow the motion of its neighbours.
If both agents are similarly conﬁdent,
their neighbours’
motion will not have much inﬂuence while as the difference
gets larger, the impact of the neighbours will be stronger.

The vector difference (vmvmvm − vivivi) is used to adjust the
velocity. Note that only when the two vector vmvmvm and vivivi is
completely same both in direction and magnitude will it take
no effect, in other words, even if two agents move in same
direction, still, the auxiliary controller will force them to be
at the same speed.

We can generalize ﬂocking algorithms using some policy

Φ to be

uuu = Φ(xxx)

(3)

So it will be convenient to modify the ﬁnal control action

by an assistant control action ¯uuu using policy ¯Φ as

˙uuu = Φ(xxx) + ¯Φ(xxx)

= uuu + ¯uuu

(4)

Our ConfScore gives a good measurement to the agents
and the auxiliary controller can push the agent to follow
at least one best neighbour, which prevents agents losing
communication with other agent .

IV. EXPERIMENT

We apply the auxiliary controller to ﬂocking controller
proposed in [19, 21] which cover centralized, decentralized,
learning-based and non-learning-based methods to see how
the auxiliary controller can improve the performance of dif-
ferent kinds of methods. We examine the performance under
different settings of number of agents NNN , communication
radius RRR and maximum initial velocity VVV . ConfScore-based
auxiliary controller is denoted as SA for simplicity. We use
the variance in velocities

L =

1
N

T
(cid:88)

N
(cid:88)

n=1

j=1

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
vvvj,n −
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

1
N

(cid:34) N
(cid:88)

i=1

vvvi,n

(cid:35)(cid:13)
2
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(5)

as our cost function.

A. Applying to Non-learning-based Method

uuulocal proposed in [19] can be used as a local controller

to make the control action. Its centralized version

uuu∗

i = −

(cid:88)

j∈nnn

(vvvi − vvvj) −

(cid:88)

j∈nnn

∇riUij

(6)

is a more powerful controller yet needs access to the global
information. Both uuulocaland uuu∗ have no learnable parameters.
We apply the auxiliary controller to both of the controllers
and examine the performance based on different settings. For
a local controller, the controller should enforce the agents not
to disperse sparsely at early stage otherwise the drastic lost
of neighbours will quickly occur. The performance of a local
controller depends highly on the number of the neighbours
each agent have because it relies only on local information
to decide its control action. Once an agent completely loses
communication with its peers, it will simply keep moving
in its original velocity unless it comes into its peers again,
which rarely happens.

The auxiliary controller helps improve the robustness of
the controller in regard with the maximum initial velocity.

(a) Local controller with SA

(b) Local controller

At

the initial state of the process,

Fig. 2.
the auxiliary controller
successfully constrains the swarm from scattering, while the local controller
cannot. VVV is set to be 3.5m/s, NNN =100 and RRR=1m.

As Fig.2 shows, the main reason for the local controller to
behave poorly as the maximum initial velocity increases is
that high velocity will cause the agents to quickly scatter
at the very beginning, and it will result in a random mo-
tion behaviour. However, the auxiliary controller can help
alleviate this situation in that the magnitude of the auxiliary
controller is in proportion to the velocity of the agents and the
ConfScore can selectively amplify or shrink the magnitude.
So the swarm can keep cohesive even if it is driven by a
high velocity. In Fig.2(a), the swarm is driven by the fast
initial speed and get scattered. But in Fig.2(b), the agents
are still cohesive. We ﬁx the NNN to be 100 and RRR to be 1m.
From Fig.2(b) we can see that the performance of a local
controller with auxiliary controller is far more stable than a
vanilla one.

The number of neighbours will increase as the communi-
cation radius increases, thus each agent can sample more
neighbours’ speed so as to choose a better leader. As is
shown in Fig. 3, when the swarm is ﬁrst initialized, due to the
randomness of velocity, the distribution of the ConfScores is
largely dependent on the position of the agents. Generally,
an agent’s ConfScore is higher if it is located near the center
of the swarm , as it will have more neighbours, and lower
if it is closed to the margin. This can cause an phenomenon
that the outer agents tend to follow the motion of the inner
ones which can help prevent the agents from scattering. As

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 3. ConfScores distribution under different communication radius. (a) and (b) show the initial and ﬁnal scores of the ﬂock under when Comm. Radius
is 1.5m while (c) and (d) shows the situation under 4.0m. The cosine similarity is normalized to be in range [0, 1] for better illustration.

the process proceeds, the distribution of the ConfScores will
be attributed to the communication radius R. As in Fig.3(b)
a small R = 1.5m will result in that the agents with high
scores scatter over the entire swarm while in Fig.3(d) a large
R = 4m will then make the conﬁdent agents gather in the
center of the swarm. In consequence, the entire swarm tends
to split up if the communication radius is too small while
much more robust as the radius increases.

We also examine different k values. As k increases from
1, instead of only focusing on the leader of the highest score,
each agent pays more attention to other neighbours. However,
different to simple averaging over the velocity of an agent’s
neighbours, the assistant acceleration actually only focuses
on those neighbours whose scores are higher ignoring those
with scores lower than the agent itself, even if they are among
its top-k neighbours. Increase in k can enhance the robustness
of the acceleration since it is intuitive that the weighted
average over the top-k neighbours can avoid the situation
where a fake leader, whose motion may be in consistency
with its neighbours while different from the whole swarm,
may be too conﬁdent about itself and just split the original
swarm leading some agents to move in a wrong way with it.
We also test on the global controller uuu∗ to see how it
works. As we can see from ﬁg.4(b), 4(d), 4(e), the auxiliary

controller can also help a global controller to achieve better
performance, although as the communication radius varies,
the controller will sometimes become unstable. In general,
still, it is of much beneﬁt.

B. Applying to Learning-based Method

As is illustrated, the auxiliary controller can be conducive
to non-learning methods, likewise, it can be readily applied
to a learning-based method.

DAGNN proposed by [21] uses imitation learning to train
an aggregation graph neural network as a local controller. It
imitates the behavior of a global expert algorithm by utilizing
local observation shared by multi-hop information exchange.
The auxiliary controller is compatible with an imitation
learning algorithm in that it doesn’t cause the failure of
convergence. We conduct experiments on different stages
when we apply the auxiliary controller to DAGNN, namely
we (1) train a DAGNN with auxiliary controller and (2) apply
the controller to the output of a pre-trained DAGNN model. It
can be seen from Fig.4(b), 4(d), 4(e) the auxiliary controller
can largely help the improvement of the DAGNN model in
both ways.

Use of the auxiliary controller helps the local DAGNN
controller to excel the performance of a global control. The

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Fig. 4. Experimental results on different numbers of agents, maximum initial velocity and communication radius.

drawback of a local controller mainly lies in the lost of
communication caused by scattering and since the auxiliary
controller can largely help alleviate the scattering problem,
it is of much beneﬁt to the existent local controllers. Further,
As the communication radius expands, the performance of
a vanilla DAGNN plateaus,
the application of auxiliary
controller helps the model break through the bottleneck to
achieve better performance as shown in Fig.4(f).

V. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that the utility of auxiliary con-
troller is convenient and compatible to various kinds of ex-
isting ﬂocking algorithms. We test it under different settings

of the scale, communication radius and maximum initial
velocity of swarms. We show that the auxiliary controller
is adaptive to the scale of the swarm and can improve
other algorithms’ robustness. It was also discussed that
how the distribution of ConfScore varies due to different
communication radius and how it takes affect to keep the
agents cohesive. We propose the ConfScore to be a proper
measurement of an agent’s motion quality and the auxiliary
controller to be a general tool to improve the performance
of the ﬂocking task.

[15] St´ephane Ross and Drew Bagnell. “Efﬁcient reduc-
tions for imitation learning”. In: Proceedings of the
thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and statistics. JMLR Workshop and Conference
Proceedings. 2010, pp. 661–668.

[16] St´ephane Ross, Geoffrey J Gordon, and J Andrew
Bagnell. “No-regret reductions for imitation learning
and structured prediction”. In: In AISTATS. Citeseer.
2011.

[17] Fabian Schilling, Julien Lecoeur, Fabrizio Schiano,
and Dario Floreano. “Learning vision-based ﬂight in
drone swarms by imitation”. In: IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 4.4 (2019), pp. 4523–4530.
[18] Herbert G Tanner. “Flocking with obstacle avoidance
in switching networks of interconnected vehicles”. In:
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA’04. 2004. Vol. 3.
IEEE. 2004, pp. 3006–3011.

[19] Herbert G Tanner, Ali Jadbabaie, and George J Pappas.
“Stable ﬂocking of mobile agents part I: dynamic
topology”. In: 42nd IEEE International Conference on
Decision and Control (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37475).
Vol. 2. IEEE. 2003, pp. 2016–2021.

[20] Demetri Terzopoulos. “Artiﬁcial

graphics”.
(1999), pp. 32–42.

In: Communications of

life for computer
the ACM 42.8

[21] Ekaterina Tolstaya et al. “Learning decentralized con-
trollers for robot swarms with graph neural networks”.
In: Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR. 2020,
pp. 671–682.

[22] G´abor V´as´arhelyi et al. “Optimized ﬂocking of au-
tonomous drones in conﬁned environments”. In: Sci-
ence Robotics 3.20 (2018).

[23] G´abor V´as´arhelyi et al. “Outdoor ﬂocking and for-
mation ﬂight with autonomous aerial robots”. In:
2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems. IEEE. 2014, pp. 3866–3873.
[24] Petar Veliˇckovi´c et al. “Graph attention networks”. In:

arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 (2017).

[25] Tamas Vicsek. “A question of scale”. In: Nature

411.6836 (2001), pp. 421–421.

[26] Kevin Warburton and John Lazarus. “Tendency-
distance models of social cohesion in animal groups”.
In: Journal of
theoretical biology 150.4 (1991),
pp. 473–488.

[27] Zonghan Wu et al. “A comprehensive survey on graph
neural networks”. In: IEEE transactions on neural
networks and learning systems (2020).

REFERENCES

[1] CM Breder Jr. “Equations descriptive of ﬁsh schools
and other animal aggregations”. In: Ecology 35.3
(1954), pp. 361–370.

[2] Wolfram Burgard et al. “Collaborative multi-robot
exploration”. In: Proceedings 2000 ICRA. Millen-
nium Conference. IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation. Symposia Proceedings (Cat.
No. 00CH37065). Vol. 1. IEEE. 2000, pp. 476–481.

[3] Zhiqiang Cao et al. “Cooperative hunting by dis-
tributed mobile robots based on local interaction”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 22.2 (2006), pp. 402–
406.

[4] Fernando Gama, Antonio G Marques, Geert Leus,
and Alejandro Ribeiro. “Convolutional neural network
architectures for signals supported on graphs”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 67.4 (2018),
pp. 1034–1049.

[5] Ting-Kuei Hu et al. “VGAI: End-to-End Learning
of Vision-Based Decentralized Controllers for Robot
Swarms”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02308 (2020).
[6] Ali Jadbabaie, Jie Lin, and A Stephen Morse. “Co-
ordination of groups of mobile autonomous agents
using nearest neighbor rules”. In: IEEE Transactions
on automatic control 48.6 (2003), pp. 988–1001.
[7] Arbaaz Khan, Ekaterina Tolstaya, Alejandro Ribeiro,
and Vijay Kumar. “Graph policy gradients for large
scale robot control”. In: Conference on Robot Learn-
ing. PMLR. 2020, pp. 823–834.

[8] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. “Semi-supervised
classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016).

[9] Qingbiao Li, Weizhe Lin, Zhe Liu, and Amanda
Prorok. “Message-aware graph attention networks
for
In:
large-scale multi-robot path planning”.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6.3 (2021),
pp. 5533–5540.

[10] David J Low. “Following the crowd”. In: Nature

407.6803 (2000), pp. 465–466.

[11] Arvind Merwaday and Ismail Guvenc. “UAV assisted
heterogeneous networks for public safety communi-
cations”. In: 2015 IEEE wireless communications and
networking conference workshops (WCNCW). IEEE.
2015, pp. 329–334.

[12] Akira Okubo. “Dynamical aspects of animal grouping:
swarms, schools, ﬂocks, and herds”. In: Advances in
biophysics 22 (1986), pp. 1–94.

[13] Wolfgang D Rencken. “Concurrent localisation and
map building for mobile robots using ultrasonic sen-
sors”. In: Proceedings of 1993 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS’93). Vol. 3. IEEE. 1993, pp. 2192–2197.
[14] Craig W Reynolds. “Flocks, herds and schools: A
distributed behavioral model”. In: Proceedings of the
14th annual conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques. 1987, pp. 25–34.

