International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Engineering Cooperative JADE Agents with the AMCIS 
Methodology: The Transportation Management Case Study 

Djamel Benmerzoug, Salim Djaaboub, and Hani Mahmoudi  

Department of Computer Science,  
Mentouri University of Constantine 25000, Algeria 
Tel.: + 213 31 63 90 10 
E-mail : {benmerzougdj, dja_salim}@yahoo.fr 

Abstract. This paper discusses in detail important analysis and design issues emerged during 
the  development  of  an  agent-based  transportation  e-market.  This  discussion  is  based  on 
concepts  coming  from  the  AMCIS  methodology  and  the  JADE  framework.  The  AMCIS 
methodology  is  specifically  tailored  to  the  analysis  and  design  of  cooperative  information 
agent-based systems, while it supports both the levels of the individual agent structure and the 
agent  society  in  the  Multi-Agents  Systems  (MAS)  development  process.  According  to 
AMCIS,  MAS  are  viewed  as  being  composed  of  a  number  of  autonomous  cooperative  agents 
that live in an organized society, in which each agent  plays one or more specific roles, while 
their  plans  and  interaction  protocols  are  well  defined.  On  the  other  hand  JADE  is  a  FIPA 
specifications  compliant  agent  development  environment  that  gives  several  facilities  for  an 
easy and  fast  implementation. Our  aim  is to  reveal  the mapping  that  may exists  between  the 
basic concepts proposed by AMCIS for agents specification and agents interactions and  those 
provided by JADE for agents implementation, and therefore to propose a kind of roadmap for 
agents developers. 

Keywords: agent-oriented software engineering,  e-commerce,  AMCIS,  JADE.   

1  Introduction 

In the last few years, multi-agent systems (MAS) have successfully addressed a variety 
of  business  problems,  such  as  business  process  management  [10],  supply  chain 
management [6], and manufacturing scheduling [8]. The above  success is partially due 
to  the  nature  of  software  agents,  which  autonomously  perform  well-defined  activities, 
based on rules and procedures coded into their behaviour. It is widely argued that such 
systems  become  more  powerful  and  may  solve  complex  problems  when  groups  of 
different  kinds  of  agents  begin  communicating  in  an  efficient  and  effective  way  [9]. 
Indeed, several efforts have been made to develop agent-based software methodologies 
[3, 11]. However, most of the studies concentrate on specific areas of the agent software 
–  agent  models,  reasoning  logic  and  agent  actions,  agent  communication,  agent 
programming  languages  and  frameworks.  To  gain  wide  acceptance  of  agent-based 
software  in  practice,  methods  covering  the  full  software  development  cycle  from 
analysis to implementation are required. To this end, we have previously developed an 
agent-oriented  method  named  AMCIS  (an  Agent-Oriented  Method  for  Designing 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Cooperative  Information  Systems)  for  the  development  of  applications  that  support 
inter-agent cooperation [3, 4].  

In this paper we present an attempt to use the AMCIS method in order to engineer a 
MAS that is to be implemented with the JADE framework. The only pretension we have 
with  this  paper  is  to  share  our  experience  to  conceive  and  develop  a  MAS,  by 
combining AMCIS and JADE, in the context of transportation management.  

Some architectures of transportation management e-market have been provided and 
many  technologies  have  been  applied  in  this  field  [7].  however,  despite  their  efficient 
management of the underlying databases (where information about transport companies, 
costs, itineraries etc. is kept), the major drawback of these approaches is the lack of the 
methodological aspect  for the  design  of this kind of applications. It  is then frequent to 
certify  that  the  developed  systems  put  numerous  problems.  They  don’t  always  satisfy 
the users’ needs, and  don’t  provide any tools and methods to identify the requirements 
of  the  system  to  be.  So  how  to  analyze  the  requirement  of  e-market  application  is  the 
foundation stone for modelling it.  

This  paper  discusses  in  detail  important  analysis  and  design  issues  emerged  during 
the development of our agent-based transportation e-market. This discussion is based on 
concepts  coming  from  the  AMCIS  methodology  and  the  JADE  framework.  To  briefly 
introduce  these  approaches  here,  we  only  mention  that  the  AMCIS  methodology  is 
specifically  tailored  to  the  analysis  and  design  of  cooperative  information  agent-based 
systems, while it supports both the levels of the individual agent structure and the agent 
society  in  the  MAS  development  process.  According  to  AMCIS,  MAS  are  viewed  as 
being  composed  of  a  number  of  autonomous  cooperative  agents  that  live  in  an 
organized  society,  in  which  each  agent  plays  one  or  more  specific  roles,  while  their 
plans and interaction protocols are well defined (for more details, see [3, 4]). 

On  the  other  hand,  JADE  is  a  software  development  framework  [2],  fully 
implemented  in  Java,  which  aims  at  the  development  of  multi-agent  systems  and 
applications  that  comply  with  FIPA  standards  (http://www.fipa.org).  JADE  provides 
standard agent technologies and offers to the developers a number of features in order to 
simplify  the  development  process.  Following  JADE,  agent  tasks  and  intentions  are 
implemented  through  the  use  of  behaviours  (for  more  details  on  this  issue,  see  
http://sharon.cselt.it/projects/jade). 

The proposed Ag-Market (AGent-based transportation e-MARKET) system able to 
efficiently  handle  transportation  transactions  of  various  types.  Agents  of  our  system 
represent and act  for any user involved in a  transportation  scenario,  such as  customers 
who  look  for  efficient  ways to  ship their products and  transport  companies  that  may  - 
fully  or  partially  -  carry  out  such  requests,  while  they  cooperate  and  get  the  related 
information  in  real-time  mode.  Our  overall  system  is  based  on  software  agents  that 
achieve  efficient  communication  among  all  parties  involved,  coordinate  the  overall 
process,  construct  possible  alternative  solutions  and  perform  the  required  decision-
making. 

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  presents  a  quick 
overview  of  the  AMCIS  method.  Section  3  discusses  in  detail  important  analysis  and 

2 

 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

design issues emerged during the development of the Ag-Market system, while  section 
4  presents  some  implementation  aspects.  Finally,  concluding  remarks  and  future  work 
directions are given in section 5. 

2  AMCIS Overview 

In the  context  of cooperative applications (particularly e-commerce)  we belief that the 
main  challenge  will  shift  towards  the  understanding  of  business  frame  and  needs,  and 
how to make decisions involving technical systems to address those needs and concerns. 
To  this  end,  we  need  a  clearer  understanding  of  what  it  means  for  systems  to  be 
"cooperative". So, the notion of  cooperation cannot be fully addressed unless the goals 
and  desires  of  agents  are  explicitly  modelled  and  argued  about.  According  to  these 
perspectives, we have developed the AMCIS method which represents a methodological 
agent-based  framework in order  to  guide the  design of cooperative  systems.  It aims to 
analyse  then  to  model  the  cooperative  processes  among  a  set  of  agent  in  measure  to 
answer their needs. 

AMCIS  identifies  three  phases  of  design,  which  operate  in  two  levels  of  abstraction 
(Figure  1).  The  Analysis  phase  produces  an  understanding  about  organizational 
relationships  and  the  rationales  behind  them.  The  System  Design  and  Agent  Design 
phases  focus  on  the  system  specification, according to the  requirements  resulting  from 
the above phase. 

Analysis Phase 

System Design Phase 

Organizational Level 

Technical Level 

Agent Design Phase 

Fig. 1.  Different  phases of the AMCIS method 

  Organizational  level:  this  level  corresponds  to  the  modelling  of  the  cooperation  during 
the  description  of  business  frame.  That  is,  the  modelling  of  the  cooperation  among  the 
various organizations in term of a set of actors, which  depend on each other for goals to 
be  achieved,  tasks  to  be  performed,  and  resources  to  be  furnished.  By  clearly  defining 
these  dependencies,  it  is  then  possible  to  state  the  why,  beside  how  and  which  are  the 
actors entering in an operation requiring their cooperation. This level defines the system's 
global  architecture  in  terms  of  subsystems,  interconnected  through  data  and  control 
flows. 

  Technical level:  this level deals  with the  specification  of the agents'  micro level. Then, 

capabilities, plans, and the communication among agents are specified in detail.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

The  following  section presents a quick overview  of the proposed  Ag-Market  system 
and its architecture and  discuss in detail important analysis and  design  issues emerged 
during the development of this system. 

3  Using AMCIS for Analysis and Design of the Ag-Market 

implementation  of 

is  a  distributed  agent-oriented 

The  Ag-Market 
transportation 
management  e-market,  where  agents  work  in  an  open  environment  as  Internet  (or 
Intranet).  The  proposed  system  (see  Fig.  2)  will  offer  efficient  mechanisms  for  the 
matching  of  requests  and  offers  for  transport  services,  as  well  as  for  the  construction  of 
feasible  solutions.  As  it  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  in  the  sequel,  the  Ag-Market 
system  is  equipped  with  the  aid  of  three  types  of  agents  (namely,  the  Broker,  the 
Customer  and  the  Provider  agents).  After  a  matching  has  been  found,  the  system  will 
dynamically  inform  the  related  users  with  the  alternative  possibilities  found  to  cover 
their  requests.  In  this  case,  our  system  considered  as  a  multi-criteria  decision  support 
tool,  through  which  buyers  may  evaluate  alternative  solutions.  More  precisely,  a 
candidate customer will be able to evaluate, through a set of criteria (delivery time, cost, 
insurance  etc.),  the  alternative  offers  found,  to  express  preferences  and  constraints 
concerning  these  criteria,  and  to  weigh  them  accordingly.  Moreover,  customers  may 
amend  some  of  the  features  of  the  offers  received,  the  aim  being  to  further  negotiate  on 
them  with  the  carriers.  Through  continuous  interaction  with  the  users,  the  system  will 
propose  the best solution  according  to the existing  information. 

Fig. 2.  The proposed Ag-Market 

The  following  section  discusses  in  detail  important  analysis  and  design  issues 

emerged during the development of our agent-based transportation e-market. 

4 

 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

3.1 Analysis Phase 

in 

the  system's  global  architecture 

Following  the  AMCIS  methodology,  the  basic  objective  in  the  analysis  of  our  system 
was  the  understanding  of  organizational  relationships  and  the  rationales  behind  them. 
This  phase  defines 
terms  of  subsystems, 
interconnected  through  data  and  control  flows.  Indeed,  AMCIS  proposes  to  use  the 
notion  of  strategic  actor  based  on  the  i*  framework  [12]  to  represent  the  cooperation  in 
the  Ag-Market  system.  This  system  is  viewed  as  consisting  of  social  actors  who  have 
freedom  of  action,  but  depend  on  each  other  for  goals  to  be  achieved,  tasks  to  be 
performed,  and  resources  to  be  furnished.  The  i*  framework  is  very  useful  to  provide  a 
higher  level  modelling  method  comparing  to  conventional  modelling  techniques  such  as 
data  flow  diagramming  and  object-oriented  analysis.  It 
the  strategic 
dependency  (SD)  model  for  describing  the  network  of  relationships  among  actors,  as 
well  as  the  strategic  rationale  (SR)  model  for  describing  and  supporting  the  reasoning 
that each actor has about its relationships  with other actors [12]. 

includes 

3.1.1  Construction of the SD model 
The  SD  model  attempts  to  define  the  cooperation  between  the  entities  of  the  system  to 
attain  global  objective.  The  Figure  3  shows  the  SD  model  for  the  example  of  our  case. 
The  SD  model  is  a  graph  where  each  node  represents  an  actor,  and  each  link  between 
two  actors  indicates  that  one  actor  depends  on  the  other  for  something  in  order  that  the 
former  may  attain  some  goal.  In  [12],  the  depending  actor  is  called  the  depender,  and 
the  actor  who  is  depended  upon  is  called  the  dependee.  The  object  around  which  the 
dependency  relationship  centers  is  called  dependum.  Authors  distinguish  among  four 
types  of  dependencies,  based  on  the  type  of  the  dependum:  hardgoal  dependency, 
softgoal dependency, task dependency and resource dependency. The softgoal having no 
clear-cut  definition  and/or  criteria  for  deciding  whether  they  are  satisfied  or  not. 
Softgoal  are  typically  used  to  model  non-functional  requirements.  For  simplicity,  in  the 
rest of the paper goal refer to hardgoal when  there is no danger of confusion.   

In  figure  3,  the  customer  depends  on  the  Broker  to  obtain  a  set  of  solution.  In  the 
other  hand,  the  Broker  depends  on  the  Customer  to  obtain  the  solution  (itinerary) 
selected.  It  can  also  depend  on  the  Provider  to  confirm  the  itinerary  selected  by  the 
Customer.  

3.1.2  Construction of the SR model 
The SR model describes a more detailed level of an actor in order to model its internal 
intentional  relationship  and  support  to  reason  of  each  actor  about  its  intentional 
relationships.  The  intentional  elements,  such  as  goals,  tasks,  resources  and  softgoals, 
appear  in  SR  model  not  only  as  external  dependencies,  but  also  as  internal  elements 
arranged into a hierarchy of means-ends and task-decompositions relationships. A goal 
may  be  associated  through  means-ends  with  multiple,  alternative  ways  to  achieve  it, 
which  are  usually  represented  as  tasks.  Task  decomposition  links  hierarchically 
decompose task into four types: sub-tasks, subgoals, resources, and softgoals [12]. In fi- 

5 

 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

LEGEND 

Fig. 3.  The SD model 

gure 4, the goals and internal intentional  relationships  of the Ag-Market  are elaborated. 

The  goal  of  the  Customer  is  to  get  an  itinerary  and  is  accomplished  by  "Itinerary 
be  decided".  This  task  can  be  decomposed  of  two  sub-tasks,  such  as  "Requirements 
of  service  be  decided"  and "Select  a  proposition". For  the Broker  agent,  it 
depends  on  the  Provider  agent  in  order  to  define  route  paths  that  successfully  address  a 
customer’s request. In the other hand, the Provider agent depends on the Broker agent  to 
get  the  customer's  requirements  and  for  updating  its  Itinerary  plan.  This  agent  has  tow 
main tasks:  "Treatment  of  reservation  request"  and  "Construction  of  the 
Itinerary  plan".  For  the  second  task,  there  are  two  ways  possible  to  carry  out  the 
demand  of  the  Broker  (first  by  "Plan  Construction"  and  second  by  "Plan 
Updating"). 

3.2   System Design Phase 
In  this  phase,  the  developer  begins  the  design  of  its  system.  He  starts  with  a  global 
design  without  entering  in  details.  This  phase  consists  of  identifying  capacities  of  each 
agent, and the links among  them (acquaintances  model). 

3.2.1  Identification of capacities of each agent 

This step consists of the identification of the capacities needed by the agents to  fulfill 
their  goals  and  satisfy  their  dependencies.  Following  the  approach  described  in  [5], 
capacities  can  be  easily  identified  by  analysing  the  SR  model.    In  particular,  each 
dependency  relationship  can  give  place  to  one  or  more  capacity  trigged  by  external 
events. To give an intuitive idea of this process let's focus on a specific actor of the SR  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Fig. 4. The SR model 

model,  such  as  the  Broker,  and  we  consider  all  the  in-going  and  out-sorting 
dependencies,  as  shown  in  figure  4.  Each  dependency  is  mapped  to  a  capacity.  So,  for 
instance, the dependency for the resource "Customer  Requirements" calls the capacity 
"Get Customer Requirements", and so on.  

3.2.2  Construction of the acquaintances model  
According  to  [11],  an  agent  acquaintance  model  (figure  5)  is  simply  a  graph,  with  the 
nodes  corresponding  to  agent  types  loosened  in  the  first  stage  of  this  phase,  and  arcs  in 
the  graph  corresponding  to  communication  pathways.  Agent  acquaintance  models  are 
directed  graphs,  and  so  an  arc  ab  indicates  that  a  will  send  messages  to  b,  but  not 
necessarily  that  b  will  send  messages  to  a.  An  acquaintance  model  may  be  derived  in  a 
straightforward  way from the SR model. 

3.3  Agent Design Phase 
This  phase  allows  better  to  detail  initial  design  and  to  refine  the  system  design.  It  is 
constituted of two steps, each of them taking charge of the construction of a model; the  

7 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Fig.5. The acquaintance model 

interactions  model  and  the  plans  model.  During  this  phase,  we  adopt  a  subset  of  the 
AUML  (for  Agent  Unified  Modelling  Language)  sequence  diagrams  proposed  in  [1]  for 
specifying  interactions  among  agents  (interaction  model)  and  the  activity  diagrams  for 
representing  agents  plans (plans model). 

3.3.1  Construction of the Interaction Model 
In  AUML  sequence  diagrams,  agents  correspond  to  objects,  whose 
is 
independent  from  the  specific  interaction  to  be  modelled  (in  UML  an  object  can  be 
created  or  destroyed  during  the  interaction);  communication  acts  between  agents 
correspond  to asynchronous  message  arcs [1]. 

life-line 

Figure  6  shows  a  simple  part  of  the  interaction  model.  In  particular,  the  diagram 
models  the  interaction  among  the  Costumer  agent,  the  Broker  agent  and  the  Provider 
agent.  The  interaction  starts  with  a  request  by  the  Customer,  and  ends  with  the  results 
presentation  by the Broker agent to the Customer.    

 Construction of the Plans Model 

3.3.2 
The  plans  model  consists  of  a  set  of  plans,  each  being  specified  with  an  activity 
diagram. This one expresses how an agent has to behave to react to an event. The  figure 
7  presents  the  Evaluate_Customer_Requirements  diagram  plan  of  the  Broker  agent 
when  it  receives  an  event  (inform)  from  the  Customer  agent.  In  this  diagram  ovals 
represent  capabilities  and arcs represent  internal  or external events. 

In  the  following  section  of  this  paper,  we  describe  the  mapping  that  may  exist 
between  the  basic  concepts  proposed  by  our  method  for  agents  specification  and  agents 
interactions  and those  provided  by JADE for agents implementation. 

4  Some Implementation Aspects 

The  platform  chosen  for  the  implementation  is  Java  Agent  Development  framework 
(JADE)  [2].  JADE  is  a  software  development  framework,  fully  implemented  in  Java, 
which  aims  at  the  development  of  multi-agent  systems  and  applications  that  comply 
with FIPA standard. To achieve such a goal, JADE offers the following list of features to 
the agent programmer:  
  Distributed agent platform. The agent platform can be distributed on several hosts, 

each one of them executes one Java Virtual Machine. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Fig.6. The AUML interaction diagram 

  FIPA-Compliant  agent  platform,  which  includes  the  Agent  Management  System, 

the Directory Facilitator and the Agent Communication Channel. 

  Efficient transport of ACL messages between agents. 

4.1  Mapping AMCIS Concepts into JADE Code 

Creating  a  JADE  agent  is  as  simple  as  defining  a  class  extending  the  Jade.core.Agent 
class  and  implementing  the  setup()  method.  The  setup()  method  is  intended  to  include 
agent initializations.  The  actual  job  an  agent  has to  do  is  presented  as  JADE  behaviours. 
Besides, the predefined behaviour  PerceptionInterface is started by setup() as shown 
in the JADE code below. 
import jade.core.*; 
public class MyAgent extends Agent  { 
  // Possible variables  
  protected void setup { 
      // to do: add necessary start-up code  
         addBehaviour(new PerceptionInterface(this)); } 
    } 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

Fig. 7. The Evaluate_Customer_Requirements Plan 

In our case, we propose to implement capabilities resulting from system design phase 
as SimpleBehaviour and plan resulting from agent design phase as FSMBehaviour class. 
The  FSMBehaviour  class  is  a  CompositeBehaviour  that  executes  its  children  (sub 
behaviour  that  are  going  to  be  used  by  FSMBehaviours)  according  to  a  Finite  State 
Machine defined by the user.  

The  perception  interface  is  derived  from  JADE  class  CyclicBehaviour  and  will 
therefore  run  continuously.  If  no  messages  have  arrived,  the  behaviour  will  block  and 
restart  after  a  new  message  has  arrived.  If  a  message  has  arrived,  the  perception 
interface  has  to  interpret  this  message  into  a  set  of  goals,  starts  PlanRetrival 
behaviour  and  resumes  waiting  for  incoming  messages.  The  PerceptionInterface 
behaviour code is shown below. 

import java.util.*;  
import jade.core.*; 
import jade.core.behaviour.*;  
import jade.lang.acl.ACLMessage.*; 
class PeceptionInterface extends CyclicBehaviour { 
  public PeceptionInterface (Agent a) {super(a);}            
  Vector goals = new Vector(); 
  public void action() { 
    // wait for message 
    ACLMessage received = myAgent.receive(); 
    if(ACLMessage == null) {block();} 
    else { 
      // message interpretation 
      ………………………… 
      // Start PlanRetrieval Behaviour 
      addBehaviour(new PlanRetrieval(this,goals));    
         } 
      } 
    } 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

The  PlanRetrival  behaviour  is  derived  from  JADE  class  SimpleBehaviour.  This 
behaviour  takes  as  parameters  a  set  of  goals  (the  results  of  message  interpretation  by 
perception  interface)  and finds  the adequate plan from the plans library.  

4.2  Inter-Agent Communication 

identify 

instance,  agents  may 

Adopting  JADE,  communication  between  agents  is  facilitated  through  predefined 
methods.  For 
themselves  with  a  unique  name 
(setName(AID)  method  of  DFAgentDescription  class),  get  registered  to  the  JADE 
platform  (register(this,  DFAgentDescription)  method  of  DFService  class),  and 
communicate  using 
the 
ACLMessage  class.  JADE  offers  the  possibility  to  follow  the  communication  between 
agents  by  means  of  the  “sniffer”  agent  which  is  a  GUI  whose  output  is  shown  in  figure 
8 (the communication  between  Customer  agent, Broker Agent  and tow Provider  agents). 

the  send(message)  and  receive(message)  methods  of 

Negotiation 

Fig. 8. Output of the JADE Sniffer agent 

5  Conclusion and Future Work 

In  this  paper  we  have  presented  the  analysis,  design  and  implementation  phases  of  an 
agent-based  transportation  e-market.  As  we  already  have  said  before,  the  only 
pretension  we  have  with  this  paper  is  to  share  our  experience  on  how  one  can  combine 
the  AMCIS  methodology  and  the  JADE  development  environment  in  order  to  implement 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Computer Science and its Applications (CIIA'2006) 

a  real  multi-agent  system.  AMCIS  methodology  is  an  easy  to  use  agent-orient  software 
development  methodology  that  however  presently,  covers  only  the  phases  of  analysis 
and  design.  On  the  other  hand  JADE  is  a  FIPA  specifications  compliant  agent 
development  environment 
fast 
implementation.  Our  aim  was  to  reveal  the  mapping  that  may  exists  between  the  basic 
concepts  proposed  by  AMCIS  for  agents  specification  and  agents  interactions  and  those 
provided  by  JADE  for  agents  implementation,  and  therefore  to  propose  a  kind  of 
roadmap for agents  developers. 

that  gives  several 

for  an  easy  and 

facilities 

Our  primary  future  work  direction  is  certainly  the  full  implementation  of  the 
electronic  marketplace  presented  in  this  paper.  Another  direction  concerns  research  on 
alternative  ways  of  coordination  of  customers  and  providers  in  our  framework.    Finally, 
further  work  needs  to  be  done  on  the  definition  of  semantics  and  syntax  of  data  and 
knowledge  conveyed  among our agents. 

6   References 

1.  Bauer,  B.,  Müller,  J.,  Odell,  J.:  Agent  UML:  A  Formalism  for  Specifying  Multiagent  Interaction. 

Agent-Oriented Software Engineering, Springer, Berlin, (2001) 91-103 

2.  Bellifemine, F., Caire, G., Trucco, T., Rimassa, G.: Jade Programmer’s Guide. JADE 3.0b1. Available 

at http://sharon.cselt.it/projects/jade/, (2003) 

3.  Benmerzoug, D., Boufaida, Z., Boufaida, M.: From the Analysis of Cooperation Within Organizational 
Environments  to  the  Design  of  Cooperative  Information  Systems:  An  Agent-Based  Approach.  R. 
Meersman et al. (Eds.): OTM Workshops 2004, LNCS Springer-Verlag, (2004) 496-506 

4.  Benmerzoug,  D.,  Boufaida,  M.,  Boufaida,  Z.:  Developing  Cooperative  Information  Agent-Based 
Systems  with  the  AMCIS  Methodology.  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Advances  in  Intelligent 
Systems: Theories and Application. Luxembourg, (2004) 

5.  Bresciani,  P.,  Giorgini,  P.,  Giunchiglia,  F.,  Mylopoulos,  J.,  Perini,  A.:  TROPOS:  An  Agent-Oriented 

Software Development Methodology. Accepted in JAAMAS, (2003) 

6.  Fox, M.S., Barbuceanu, M., and Teigen, R.: Agent-Oriented Supply-Chain Management. International 

Journal of Flexible Manufacturing Systems 12(2/3), (2000) 165-188. 

7.  Nikos  Karacapilidis,  Alexis  Lazanas,  Pavlos  Moraïtis.:  an  agent-mediated  marketplace  for 

transportation transactions. Proc in ICEIS’03, (2003) 238-243 

8.  Shen  W.  and  Norrie,  D.H.:  An  Agent-Based  Approach  for  Dynamic  Manufacturing  Scheduling.  In 
Proceedings  of  Autonomous  Agents'98  Workshop  on  Agent-Based  Manufacturing,  Minneapolis/St. 
Paul, MN, (1998) 117-128. 

9.  Sycara,  K.,  and  Zeng,  D.,  1996.  Coordination  of  Multiple  Intelligent  Software  Agents.  International 

Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 5(2-3). 

10. Jennings,  N.,  Faratin,  P.  Norman,  T.J.,  O'Brien,  P.  and  Odgers,  B.,  2000.  Autonomous  Agents  for 
Business Process Management. International Journal of Applied Artificial Intelligence 14(2), 145-189. 
11. Wooldridge, M.,  Jennings, N., Kinny, D.: The GAIA Methodology for Agent-Oriented Analysis and 

Design. Journal of Autonomous Agents and MAS, (2000) 285-312 

12. Yu, E.: Agent Orientation as a Modelling Paradigm. Wirtschaftsinformatic. 43(2), (2001) 123-132  

12 

 
 
 
 
