Using Agent to Coordinate Web Services 

C. H. Liu, Y. F. Lin and  Jason J. Y. Chen 
Department of Computer Science & Information Engineering 
National Central University 
Jhong-Li, Taiwan 
jasonjychen@gmail.com 

Abstract— Traditionally, agent and web service are two separate 
research  areas.  We  figure  that,  through  agent  communication, 
agent is suitable to coordinate web services. However, there exist 
agent communication problems due to the lack of uniform, cross-
platform vocabulary. Fortunately, ontology defines a vocabulary. 
We  thus  propose  a  new  agent  communication  layer  and  present 
the  web  ontology  language  (OWL)-based  operational  ontologies 
that  provides  a  declarative  description.  It  can  be  accessed  by 
various  engines  to  facilitate  agent  communication.  Further,  in 
our  operational  ontologies,  we  define  the  mental  attitudes  of 
agents that can be shared among other agents. Our architecture 
enhanced the 3APL agent platform, and it is implemented as an 
agent  communication  framework.  Finally,  we  extended  the 
framework to be compatible with the web ontology language for 
service  (OWL-S),  and  then  develop  a  movie  recommendation 
system  with  four  OWL-S  semantic  web  services  on  the 
framework. The benefits of this work are: 1) dynamic web service 
through  uniform 
coordination,  2)  ontological 
representation,  namely,  the  declarative  description,  and  3)  easy 
reuse  and  extension  of  both  ontology  and  engine  through 
extending ontology. 

reasoning 

Keywords-  agent  communication;  semantic  web  service;  agent 

mentality layer 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

Traditionally,  agent  and  web  service  are  two  separate 
research  areas.  The  research  on  agent  focuses  on  problem 
solving  mechanisms  in  distributed  environment.  A  widely 
known  agent  model  is  the  belief,  desire  and  intention  (BDI) 
model.  Each  agent  has  its  capability  (actions).  Also,  each  has 
its  mental  attitude  (what  it  believes).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
research  on  web  service  concentrates  on  distributed  technique 
and  standard  such  as  web  service  description  language 
(WSDL), simple object access protocol (SOAP) and universal 
definition  and  discovery  integrated  (UDDI).    However,  web 
services  are  not  reliable  and  easy-to-use  due  to  the  fact  that 
they  are  at  remote  sites  that  a  user  has  no  control  over  them. 
Additionally,  the  web  services  provide  a  static  description  on 
the Web, thereby making it more difficult for users to use them. 

Incidentally,  the  Semantic  Web  is  a  highly-anticipated 
infrastructure  for  agents  to  run  on  it  and  to  perform  complex 
actions for their users [1] [2] [3]. Further, an agent is suitable to 
coordinate with each other with the same purpose in distributed 
environments  [4]  [5].  For  example,  an  agent  is  able  to 
proactively request other agents for a movie recommendation, 
and  then  the  requested  agents  respond  reactively  the  name  of 

*A  previous  version  of  this  paper  was  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering  Research  and  Practice 
(SERP 08), Las Vegas, USA, July 14-17, 2008. 

agent 

through 

communication.  For 

some  movies  such  as  “Night  at  the  museum”  or  “Brokeback 
Mountain” 
agent 
communication, the Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents 
(FIPA) interaction protocol forms a suite of protocol standards, 
which  defines  22  communicative  acts.  Through 
the 
communication  mechanisms,  the  agent  decides  the  proper 
agents  to  execute  their  actions,  which  are  implemented  as 
semantic  web services  that  in  turn  are  annotated  web  services 
in  this  paper.  Thus,  the  web  services  can  be  coordinated 
through the agent communication [6]. 

A  problem  with  agent  communication  is  that  there  is  no 
cross-platform, uniform vocabulary to identify concepts used in 
various agent programs. Further, when an agent communicates 
with other agents, it cannot predict the mental attitudes of other 
agents  with  its  mental  model.  This  causes  difficulty  and 
in  communication.  The  method  of  agent 
complexity 
communication is thus questioned by some researches [7] [8]. 
John Yen [9] introduced a manner in which the agents can form 
a  team  and  share  mental  models  with  each  other  in  order  to 
make  decisions.  Fortunately,  ontology  is  a  document  that 
formally defines a vocabulary [10]. The web ontology language 
(OWL)  is  a  popular  language  to  describe  ontology,  and  it 
allows people to utilize the uniform referential identifier (URI) 
to  give  every  concept  a  specific  term  such  as  those  used  in 
agent  communication.  It  also  defines  semantics  of  the  terms, 
and organizes all kinds of terms by using relations among the 
terms. The terms can be shared among agents. 

A special ontology is called operational ontology, in which 
the  operational  concepts  are  represented  in  a  declarative 
description.  By  using  OWL  to  describe  the  operational 
ontology [11], this problem can be solved. Further, the mental 
attitudes  of  agents  are  shared  among  other  agents,  which  is 
called proposition ontology (to be covered shortly). 

This  paper  presents  an  agent  communication  framework 
with  operational  ontology,  as  well  as  the  mental  attitude  of 
agent, to facilitate agent communication. 

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Firstly,  we  depict  the 
agent communication layers stack and the ontology associated 
with  each  layer  in  section  2.  Secondly,  we  explain  the  agent 
communication  architecture  that  consists  of  the  declarative 
descriptions for ontology and the engines to access them. Next, 
the  architecture  is  implemented  to  a  framework  by  enhancing 
the 3APL agent platform in section 3. Then, the framework is 
extended to be compatible with the web ontology language for 
a  movie 
service 

(OWL-S).  Further,  we 

develop 

 
 
 
recommendation  system  with  four  OWL-S  services  on  our 
framework  in  section  4.  Lastly  we  give  the  conclusion  in 
section 5. 

communicative act refers to an action description as well as a 
proposition description in the content language description. 

II.  AGENT COMMUNICATION LAYER AND ITS ONTOLOGY 

We  propose  the  new  agent  communication  layer  with 
operational ontologies. Firstly, we will introduce the new agent 
communication  layer  in  section  2.1,  and  then  describe  its 
ontology in section 2.2. 

A.  New agent communication layer 

The  new  agent  communication  layer,  called  the  Agent 
Mentality Layer, lie between the Content Language Layer and 
the Message Transport Layer. It makes the message transported 
capable  of  transmitting  mental  attitudes  of  agents.  Thus,  the 
mental attitudes could be shared among agents. Ontologies are 
vocabularies 
that  should  be  obeyed  when  agents  are 
communicating with each other. For each agent communication 
layer in Figure 1, a corresponding operational ontology is also 
defined. 

Figure 1: A New Agent Communication Layer Stacks 

Note that the message transport layer is not covered in the 
paper. In the agent mentality layer, the proposition ontology is 
used to define the representation of mental attitudes of agents, 
which  is  the  abstract  concept  of  agents  and  is  represented  by 
property  “belief”.  Also,  in  this  layer,  action  and  capability  of 
agents are defined by action ontology. In the content language 
layer,  the  content  language  ontology  defines  the  message 
representation. In the communication act layer, communicative 
act ontology defines formal semantics of every communicative 
act. As for the highest interaction protocol layer, the interaction 
protocol ontology defines the state shift during communication. 
It  constitutes  all  communication  acts  and  thus  forms  a 
conversation pattern, which then becomes a restricted standard 
of  communication  amid  agents.  Briefly  summing  up,  the  five 
the  agent 
operational  ontologies  are  collectively  called 
the  documents  of 
communication  ontology,  and 
these 
ontologies  are  referred 
the  agent  communication 
to  as 
description. 

The  relationship  of  the  documents  is  shown  in  Figure  2. 
Every  description  in Figure 2  refers  to one another via  a  URI 
reference.    Every  interaction  protocol  description  refers  to 
multiple  communicative  act  descriptions.    Similarly,  every 

Figure 2: Agent Communication Description 

B.  Agent communication ontology 

The  agent  communication  ontology  provides  the  formal 
specifications of the terms and their relations in the domain of 
agent  communication.  In  the  following,  we  will  briefly 
introduce  three  main  parts  of  agent  communication  ontology: 
(1)  Interaction  Protocol  Ontology,  (2)  Communication  Act 
Ontology and (3) Proposition Ontology. 

Figure 3 illustrates the interaction protocol ontology, which 

has four main concepts: 

•  Protocol:  It  has  the  constructedBy  property,  which 
constructs  the  interaction  protocol,  and  it  also  has  the 
hasInitiator  and  hasParticipant  properties,  which 
indicate the agents involved in this interaction. 

• 

Initiator  and  Participant:  An  initiator  initiates  the 
interaction,  and  participant(s)  represents  the  agent(s) 
involved in the interaction. 

•  State:  It  represents  the  interaction  status  of  agents, 
which  has  three  subclasses:  (1)  start  state,  (2)  transit 
state and (3) accept state. Start state is at the beginning 
of  the  interaction;  the  accept  state  is  at  the  end  of  the 
interaction, and the transit state is the intermediate state. 

•  Transition: It stands for the transition between the state 
and communication. Through the “execute” property, it 
could trigger a communicative act. 

Figure 3: The Interaction Protocol Ontology 

 
 
 
 
to  define 

the  communicative  act  ontology, 

Figure  4  illustrates  the  communication  act  ontology.  In 
order 
the 
classification of communicative acts presented here is based on 
the works of Searle [12]. In our classification, the expressives 
represent  the  content,  which  contains  a  reason  and  an  action; 
the  commissives  represent  the  content,  which  contains  a 
condition  and  an  action;  the  directives  represent  the  content, 
which only contains an action; and the assertives represent the 
content, which contains only a proposition. 

Figure 4: The Communication Act Ontology 

Figure 5 shows the proposition ontology, which formalizes 
the  agent  mental  model  shared  among  agents.  It  is  useful  to 
construct  the  cooperation  among  agents.  The  proposition 
ontology has three main parts as described below: 

•  Proposition: A proposition which is described in three 
parts  —  subject,  predicate  and  object  —  and  it 
represents a statement. 

•  Extended  proposition:  Extended  proposition 

is  a 
proposition, which adds one valid time to represent the 
time when the proposition occurs to one agent. 

•  Embedded  proposition:  Embedded  proposition  is  an 
extended  proposition,  which  adds  the  “belief”  to 
indicate  whether  someone  believes  in  this  proposition 
or not. 

Figure 5: The Proposition Ontology 

III.  AGENT COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURE 

As shown in Figure 6, our architecture contains the Mental 
Model,  Action  Engine,  Proposition  Engine,  Communicative 
Act  (CA)  Engine,  and  Protocol  Engine.  Additionally,  the 
architecture also contains 3APL agent platform as the planner, 
and Data Model as the ontology storage. 

Figure 6: Agent Communication Architecture 

Next we will dilate each component in the architecture. 

• 

Interaction  Protocol  Engine:  The  interaction  protocol 
engine  processes  interaction  protocol  description.  It 
identifies the agent who participates in communication, 
records the communication state, and then invokes CA 
Engine to transform the state. 

•  CA Engine: The CA engine processes communicative 
act description. It evaluates the feasibility precondition, 
updates  the  mental  model  by  rational  effect.  If  action 
exists  in  the  description,  the  action  engine  will  be 
invoked. 

•  Action Engine: The action engine processes the action 
description. It decides the way to execute actions such 
as  sequence,  concurrence,  alternative  and  iteration. 
Moreover,  the  actions’  precondition  will  also  be 
evaluated before execution, and then the actions’ effect 
will be updated in the data model after execution. 

•  Proposition  Engine:  The  proposition  engine  processes 
the  proposition  description.  It  reifies  a  statement  in 
data model as a proposition in mental model. It allows 
a statement to have different manifestations if needed. 

• 

3APL  Agent  Platform:  A  3APL  is  a  Prolog-based 
agent  platform.  It  contains  a  goal  base,  a  belief  base, 
and  a  plan  base  that  stores  goals,  beliefs,  and  plans, 
respectively.  Besides,  it  contains  plan  rules  to  infer 
plans  and  an  mProlog-based  engine  [13]  to  deliberate 
these rules. Our work tries to extend this platform with 
subscribing the proposition in the mental model as data 
source of belief base. 

•  Mental  Model:  The  mental  model  stores  the  reified 
statements  i.e.  propositions.  It  provides  a  belief 
algorithm [14] to appropriately allocate the proposition 
as an actual world or imaginary worlds. 

•  Data  Model:  The  data  model  [15]  stores  domain 
ontologies  and  statements  which  are  generated  form 

 
 
these  ontologies.  The  ontologies  are  regarded  as  data 
types  of  actions’  input/output  and  generate  statements 
as their values. 

A.  Executing agent communication description 

Our  agent  communication  is  based  on  the  FIPA  formal 
semantics,  which  is  questioned  by  some  researches  [16]  [17] 
who point out that an agent is unable to predict mental attitudes 
of  other  agents  by  checking  its  own  attitudes.  Thus,  if  we 
regard these attitudes as precondition for communication, they 
should  be  checked.  Further,  if  we  consider  them  as  effect  of 
communication,  they  probably  cannot  be  determined  by  the 
sender agent, because the effect is administered by the recipient 
agent.  Therefore,  we  would  say  an  agent  itself  cannot  predict 
an intended purpose.  

In  our  architecture  (see  Figure7),  the  mental  model  is 
defined  by  OWL  and  shared  among  agents.  Further,  the  data 
model saves an action’s effect and output executed by an agent, 
which  is  sharable  too.  Thus,  there  is  no  above  mentioned 
problem. 

Figure 7: Agent Communication Framework 

The  execution  process  of  the  engines  and  the  declarative 

descriptions is shown in six steps below: 

Step 1: The interaction protocol engine will read the agent 
communication  description.  It  will  read  the  section  of  the 
interaction  protocol  description  and  then  confirm  participative 
agents by using the initiator and the participant. Afterwards, it 
will  put  decomposition  rules  (plan  rules)  [18]  owned 
respectively  by  agents  into  plan  bases  of  the  3APL  agent 
platform. 

Step 2: The interaction protocol engine then enters a certain 
stage and orders the CA engine to perform the transition. Then 
it  considers  the  internal  communicative  act  as  a  parameter, 
which will be transmitted into the CA engine with the initiator 
and participant. 

Step  3:  By  viewing  the  agent  mental  states  in  the  mental 
model, the CA engine can evaluate the feasibility precondition 

(FP)  of  this  CA.  If  there  is  no  state  left,  this  algorithm 
terminates.  In  contrary,  It  is  necessary  to  meet  the  demand  of 
the  FP  and  insert  all  parameters,  including  the  initiator,  the 
participant  (come  from  the  protocol  description,  and  they  are 
necessary),  the  action  and  the  proposition  (come  from  the 
content  language  description,  and  they  are not  necessary) into 
it.  Then,  it  will  call  respectively  the  action  engine  and 
proposition engine to execute processes depicted below. If not, 
the interaction will come to an end. 

Step  4:  By  viewing  the  domain  knowledge  in  the  data 
model,  the  action  engine  can  evaluate  the  precondition  of  the 
action. If it forms, this action will be executed, and the effect of 
the execution will be recorded in the data model. At the same 
time,  if  there  has  an  output  which  will  be  transmitted  to  the 
propositional  engine  and  be  reified  to  mental  model.  By 
contraries, if it fails to form, the execution of the action will be 
called  off.  Next,  the  explanation  of  this  cancellation,  such  as 
the  precondition  and  the  input  bringing  about  the  failure,  will 
be transmitted to the propositional engine and be reified mental 
model. 

Step 5: When the execution of the action is finished, the CA 
engine  can  store  outputs  and  reasons  that  are  reified  from  the 
proposition engine. Those outputs and reasons are very useful 
when we are ought to judge the CA next time. 

Step 6: Go back to Step 2 and enter the next stage. 

B.  Selecting agent communication description 

In  section  3.1,  we  described  how  agents  communicate 
through  the  agent  communication  description.  Here,  we  are 
going  to  elaborate  how  agents  select  appropriate  agent 
communication  description  before  communication.  The 
selection  process  and  the  interaction  of  engines  will  be 
discussed next. 

If  the  planner  infers  plans  to  be  “external  actions”  (not 
agent capabilities by itself), the planner knows the agent itself 
cannot complete a certain task, it will seek help from external 
agents to move closer to the goal. The agent can coordinate or 
cooperate with external agents for that. The difference between 
coordination  and  cooperation  is  that  if  descriptions  are 
protocols  [19]  [20]  of  contract  net  family,  the  agent  uses 
coordination;  inversely,  if  they  are  protocols  [21]  [22]  of 
request family, the agent uses cooperation. Certainly, there are 
also  protocols  [23]  [24]  of  broker  family.  However,  that 
involves interaction of all agents, and it is not discussed here. 

The process of selection can be divided into three steps: 1) 
external  action  selection  and  2)  communicative  act  selection 
and 3) interaction protocol selection. 

Step  1:  An  external  action  selection.  Agents  would  query 
the  action  registry  about  the  location  of  the  agents  with  the 
capability of executing this external action. If they find out an 
agent,  they  will  send  the  action  description  into  the  action 
engine; if not, they will terminate. 

Action  engine  evaluates  effects  in  action  description  with 
data  model  as  the  information  source  to  supply  necessary 
parameters  such  as  output  or  other 
local  variables.  If 
evaluations succeed, proposition engine will reify and transmit 

 
the  effects  to  mental  model  where  they  can  be  preserved.  On 
the  contrary,  if  evaluations  fail,  it  will  terminate.  Note  if  this 
action  description  was  ever  executed  by  agents  offering 
actions,  output  will  remain  to  exist  in  data  model.  Thus,  we 
have  to  make  agents  be  able  to  share  data  model  and  mental 
model with each other. 

Step 2: A communicative act selection. The CA engine use 
external  actions  and  output  of  mental  model  as  parameters  to 
evaluate  rational  effect  of  a  number  of  the  FIPA  22  CAs 
descriptions  [25].  If  evaluations  are  successful,  it  will  choose 
and send this CA description to interaction protocol engine; if 
not, it will go back to the 1. 

Step 3: An interaction protocol selection. After the protocol 
engine receives CA descriptions, with which it will choose the 
interaction  protocol  description.  Later,  the  chosen  protocol 
description  will  replace  the  original  external  action.  Then,  it 
will be finished. 

Our  action  communication  description  is  the  description 
which linked the action description with the CA description as 
well as the interaction protocol description. 

C.  Aagent communication enchanced 3APL deliberation 

cycle 
By using agent communication description just mentioned, 
the 3APL deliberation cycle is enhanced, as shown in Figure 8. 

If this goal is a basic action, the agent will make a judgment 
if  this  action  is  external  or  not.  If  not,  the  agent  will  find  the 
capabilities in the belief base. If they are found, this action will 
be carried out. 

If the action is external, it means that the agent itself cannot 
carry  it  out.  At  this  point,  the  agent  will  question  the 
matchmaker:  “Which  agent  is  able  to  execute  this  external 
action?” Subsequently, the agent will decide on one interaction 
protocol by searching for proper communicative act and follow 
this  protocol  to  coordinate  or  collaborate  with  another  agent 
that will execute this external action. 

IV.  AGENT COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK FOR SEMANTIC 
WEB SERVICES 

We extend the framework in Figure 7 to be compatible with 
the  OWL-S,  as  shown  in  Figure  9.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the 
action  ontology  is  defined  in  the  agent  mentality  layer.  In 
Figure  7,  we  extended  the  action  ontology  to  refer  to  the 
declarative  description,  which  is  represented  by  OWL-S 
Service  description.  Then,  we  can  reuse  OWL-S’s  process 
engine  [26]  and  OWLS/UDDI  Matchmaker  [27]  to  execute 
OWL-S process and OWL-S profile, respectively. 

Figure 8: Agent Communication Enhanced 3APL Deliberation Cycle 

The agent chooses one goal in goal base, and judge whether 
it is a composed action or not. If yes, the agent will choose the 
plan rule to decompose and execute it (the condition of choice 
is that if the current state of brief case satisfies the guard of the 
plan rule). After the execution, the newly-produced plan will be 
stored  in  the  plan  base.  At  the  same  time,  for  the  purpose  of 
completing  sub-goals  decomposed  by  the  plan  rule,  the  agent 
will choose a new plan rule to carry out. 

The agent chooses one goal in goal base, and judge whether 
it is a composed action or not. If yes, the agent will choose the 
plan rule to decompose and execute it (the condition of choice 
is that if the current state of brief case satisfies the guard of the 
plan rule). After the execution, the newly-produced plan will be 
stored  in  the  plan  base.  At  the  same  time,  for  the  purpose  of 
completing  sub-goals  decomposed  by  the  plan  rule,  the  agent 
will choose a new plan rule to carry out. 

Figure 9: Agent Communication Framework for Semantic Web Services 

On this extended architecture, we added: 1) Web service, 2) 
OWL/UDDI  Matchmaker,  and  3)  OWL-Process  Engine.  We 
analyze  the  three  components  from  the  viewpoint  of  OWL-S: 
1)  they  can  be  bound  to  a  web  service  through  OWL-S 
grounding,  and  they  can  be  used  by  agents. 
  2)  The 
OWL/UDDI Matchmaker provides the platform for the OWL-
S  Profile  to  register  and  match,  3)  The  OWL-Process  Engine 
allows  agent  to  invoke  web  services  according  to  the  OWL-S 
Process. 

Our  Action  Engine  is  responsible  for  controlling  these 
components.  In  reading  action,  it  will  store  input  into  data 
model  as  parameters  and  use  actions’  capabilities  to  inquire 
OWLS/UDDI Matchmaker,  attempting  to  find proper  OWL-S 
service  description,  which  will  be  read  and  executed  by  the 

 
 
OWL  process  engine.  Under  three  conditions:  1)  before 
evaluation,  2)  after  updating  precondition  and  effect  and  3) 
after  execution,  the  action  engine  will  check  the  semantics  of 
the conditions by using data model. The output of OWL-S will 
be stored into data model when 1) OWL-S process engine ends 
execution  and  2)  the  action  engine  retrieves  and  sends  the 
output back to the agent. 

V.  AN EXAMPLE 

services:  1) 

We  develop  a  movie  recommendation  system  on  the 
extended  framework.  In  this  system,  there  are  four  semantic 
web 
Information  Retrieval  Service,  2) 
Recommendation  Service,  3)  Video  Abstract  Service  and  4) 
Video  Broadcast  Service.  Agents  utilize  cooperation  and 
coordinate to interact with the semantic web service. With the 
cooperation, agent S queries the OWL-S/UDDI: 

“Which  agent(s)  offer  the  abstract  video  service  for 
“Brokeback Mountain”?” 

Then, it receives the response:  

“Agent T offers the service”. 

Then,  agent  S  decides  the  CA  to  interact  with  agent  T 
according to agent attitude. When it receives the request, it will 
judge  FP  of  CA  to  response  “agree”  or  “refuse”.  If  agreed,  it 
will execute the abstract video service. The process is shown in 
Figure 10. 

Figure 10: Cooperation with Semantic Web Service 

When  an  agent  queries  OWL-S/UDDI  and  receives  the 
response  that  involves  multiple  agents.  The  agent  will  use 
coordination to pick a proper agent. Assume agent S queries: 

“Which agents provide video broadcast service to show the 
Brokeback Mountain?” 

Then it receives the reply: 

“The agent A, B, C, and D offer this service.” 

Then, it will use Contract Net Protocol to interact with them. 
Among  them,  agent  c  and  d  have  difference  condition 
bandwidth  greater  than  1Mbps  and  bandwidth  greater  than 
2Mbps, respectively. Next, the agent S accepts the proposal of 
agent  D.  Finally,  agent  D  will  execute  the  video  broadcast 
service. The process of coordination is shown in Figure 11, and 
the  execution  result  of  the  movie  recommendation  system  is 
shown in Figure 12. 

Figure 11: Movie Recommendation System 

Figure 12: Movie Recommendation System 

VI.  CONCLUSIONS 

This  paper  defines  the  operational  ontologies  for  agent 
communication,  along  with  the  engines  to  interpret  the 
through  communication,  agents  can 
ontology.  Further, 
coordinate  with  each  other  to  execute  the  semantic  web 
services for users. This facilitates the declarative development 
of  agent  programs  and  share  mental  attitudes.  Its  advantages 
are as follow: 

1)  Dynamic  Semantic  Web  Service  Coordination: 
Operational  ontology  enables 
the  calling  agent 
communication  to  comprehend  the  meaning  of  the 
called. As a result, the calling agent communication can 
dynamically invoke the accurate semantic web service in 
accordance with semantics of operational ontology. 

 
 
 
2)  Ontological  Reasoning  with  Uniform  Representation: 
The  operational  ontology  and  domain  ontologies  stand 
for  programs  and  data,  respectively.  They  adopt  the 
same 
format,  namely  declarative 
description.  Finally,  program  and  data  on  the  semantic 
web  can  be  inferred  according  to  the  declarative 
description. 

representation 

3)  Easily  Reuse  and  Extendable 

through  Ontology 
Extension:  When  a  new  ontology  is  needed,  the 
ontology defined before can be extended by OWL.  As 
for  the  new  engines  for  the  new  ontology,  we  can  also 
reuse the engines developed before. 

Acknowledgment 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  the  anonymous  reviewers  for 

their valuable comments. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

J. Hendler, Agents and the Semantic Web, Intelligent systems, Volume 
16, Issue 2, pages 30-37, Mar-Apr. 2001. 

[2]  T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler and O. Lassila, the Semantic Web, Scientific 

American, May 2001. 

[3]  S.  B.  Palmer,  The  Semantic  Web:  An  Introduction,  available  at: 

http://infomesh.net/2001/swintro/ 

[4]  M. Barbuceanu, Coordinating agents by role based social constraints and 
the  Fourteenth  National 

conversation  plans,  In  Proceedings  of 
Conference on Artiicial Intelligence (AAAI’97), pages 16-21, 1997. 
[5]  A.  Cheyer  and  D.  Martin,  Open  Agent  Architecture,  Journal  of 
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, pages 143-
148, March 2001. 

[6]  Dominic Greenwood, Margaret Lyell, Ashok Mallya and Hiroki Suguri, 
The  IEEE  FIPA  approach  to  integrating  software  agents  and  web 
services,  In  Proceedings  of  the  6th  international  joint  conference  on 
Autoonmous agents and multiagent systems, pages 1412-1418, 2007 
[7]  M.  Dastani,  J.  van  der  Ham,  and  F.  Dignum,  Communication  for  goal 
derected  agents,  In  Communication  in  Multi-agent  Systems  –  Agent 
Communication  Language  and  Conversation  Policies,  LNCS  2650, 
pages 239-252. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2003. 

[8]  F.  Dignum  and  M.  Greaves  (Eds.),  Issues  in  Agent  Communication, 

[9] 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1916, Springer 2000. 
J, Yen, X. Fan, S. Sun, T. Hanratty, and J. Dumer, Agents with shared 
mental  models for enhancing team decision makings, Decision Support 
Systems, Vol. 41, pages 634-653,2006 

[10]  N. F. Noy & D. L. McGuinness, Ontology Development 101: A Guide 

to Creating Your First Ontology, 2001. 

[11]  Pease, I. Niles, and J. Li, 2002. The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology: 
A  Large  Ontology  for  the  Semantic  Web  and  its  Applications,    In  
Working  Notes  of  the  AAAI-2002  Workshop  on  Ontologies  and  the 
Semantic Web, Edmonton, Canada, Jul.-Aug. 

[12]  J.  R.  Searle.  A  taxonomy  of  illocutionary  acts.  Language,  Mind  and 
Knowledge, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, pages 344-
369, 1975. 

[13]  F.  Koch,  J.  J.  Meyer,  F.  Dignum,  and  I.  Rahwan,  Programming 
Deliberative  Agents  for  Mobile  Services:  the  3APL-M  Platform, 
AAMAS'05  Workshop  on  Programming  Multi-Agent  Systems 
(ProMAS05). 

[14]  L.  Winkelhagen,  M.  Dastani,  J.,  2006.  Broersen,  Beliefs  in  Agent 
Implementation, In Proceedings of the third International Workshop on 
Declarative Agent Languages and Technologies (DALT 2005), Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science 3904, Springer. 

[15]  J.  Broekstra,  A.  Kampman,  and  F.  van  Harmelen.,  2002  Sesame:  A 
generic architecture for storing and querying RDF and RDF schema. In 
the  Semantic  Web  -  ISWC  2002,  Vol.  2342  of  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer Science, pages 54-68. Springer. 

[16]  M. Dastani, J. van der Ham, and F., 2003 Dignum, Communication for 
goal directed agents, In Communication in Multi-agent Systems - Agent 
Communication  Languages  and  Conversation  Policies,  LNCS  2650, 
pages 239-252. Springer Verlag, Berlin. 

[17]  F.  Dignum  and  M.  Greaves 

in  Agent 
Communication,  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science,  Vol.  1916, 
Springer. 

(Eds.),  2000. 

Issues 

[18]  J.  Clasen,  P.  Eyerich,  G.  Lakemeyer,  and  B.  Nebel,  2007  Towards  an 
Integration  of  Golog  and  Planning,  In  20th  International  Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-07), AAAI Press. 

[19]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Contract  Net 
Interaction  Protocol  Specification,  Dec.  6,  2002,  available  at: 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00029/SC00029H.pdf. 

[20]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Iterated  Contract  Net 
Interaction  Protocol  Specification,  Dec.  6,  2002,  available  at: 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00030/SC00030H.pdf. 

[21]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Request  Interaction 
at: 
Dec. 

Protocol 
2002, 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00026/SC00026H.pdf. 

Specification, 

available 

6, 

[22]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Request  When 
Interaction  Protocol  Specification,  Dec.  6,  2002,  available  at: 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00028/SC00028H.pdf. 

[23]  Foundation for Intelligent Physical  Agents, FIPA Brokering Interaction 
at: 
Dec. 

Protocol 
2002, 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00033/SC00033H.pdf. 

Specification, 

available 

6, 

[24]  Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents, FIPA Recruiting Interaction 
at: 
Dec. 

Protocol 
2002, 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00034/SC00034H.pdf. 

Specification, 

available 

6, 

[25]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Communicative  Act 
at: 
Dec. 

2002, 
Library 
http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00037/SC00037J.pdf. 

Specification, 

available 

6, 

[26]  N.  Srinivasan,  M.  Paolucci,  and  K.  Sycara,  An  Efficient  Algorithm  for 
OWL-S based Semantic Search in UDDI, In 1st International Workshop 
on  Semantic  Web  Services  and  Web  Process  Composition  (SWSWPC 
2004), pages 6-9, 

[27]  E. 

Sirin, 

OWL-S 

API, 

available 

at 

HTTP: 

http://www.mindswap.org/2004/owl-s/api/. 

AUTHORS PROFILE 
Chih-Hao  Liu  received  his  Master  degree  of  Information  Engineering  from 
Chaoyang  University  of  Technology.  He  is  currently  a  PhD  candidate  in  the 
National  Central  University  in  Taiwan.  He  joined  the  software  engineering 
laboratory 
the  SIM  (Service-oriented 
Information  Marketplace)  project  from  2005  to  2007.  And,  his  current 
research interests focus on Semantic Web and Agent. 

in  2005.  He  also  participated 

Yong  Feng  Lin  received  his  PhD  degree  in  Information  Engineering  and 
Computer Science from the National Central University, Taiwan, in 2007. His 
research 
Intelligent 
Agent.  Recently, he is interested in applying modal extension of description 
logic to Semantic Web services. 

interests are  mainly 

on Semantic  Web 

and 

Jason  Jen  Yen  Chen  is  with  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  and 
Information Engineering in National Central University in Taiwan. He earned 
international  recognition  by  winning  Top,  Third,  and  Fifth  Scholar  in  the 
world  in  the  field  of  System  and  Software  Engineering  in  1995,  1996,  and 
1997,  respectively.  The  ranking  is  based  on  cumulative  publication  of  six 
leading  journals  in  that  field.  His  current  research  interests  include  agile 
method and agent technology. 

 
 
 
 
 
