2
0
0
2

r
p
A
9
2

]
E
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
5
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
:
v
i
X
r
a

Trading Agents for Roaming Users

MAGNUS BOMAN, MARKUS BYLUND and FREDRIK ESPINOZA
Swedish Institute of Computer Science (SICS) AB
and
MATS DANIELSON and DAVID LYB¨ACK
Financial Market Systems, OM AB

Some roaming users need services to manipulate autonomous processes. Trading agents running
on agent trade servers are used as a case in point. We present a solution that provides the agent
owners with means to upkeeping their desktop environment, and maintaining their agent trade
server processes, via a briefcase service.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.2.11 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Distributed Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence—Intelligent Agents; K.8 [Personal Computing]: Management/Maintenance

General Terms: Economics, Human Factors, Management
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Trading agent, Agent trade server, Customer preferences,
Added-value services, roaming user

1. TRADING AGENTS
Unresolved questions related to law, ethics, security, and policy [?] do not in
general prevent stock markets from applying open policies to program trading [?].
A trading agent is a piece of encapsulated autonomous software that codes the
preferences of its owner. In theoretical research, trading agents have been used in
idealized games [?], artiﬁcial markets (see, e.g., http://ArtStkMkt.sourceforge.
net/), and competitions (such as the Trading Agent Competition, see http://www.
sics.se/tac/).

Human owners of trading agents have diﬀerent levels of involvement in the coding
itself. An expert agent owner writes her own code. A less experienced agent owner
might employ a broker, which will write and carry responsibility for the code. An
unexperienced agent owner can, on some markets, select an agent from a set of
templates, such as a greedy agent, a value investor agent, a trend investor agent,
etc. Once the agent has been written, it must be checked with respect to the rules
of the marketplace.
if the marketplace
If the agent is to run on a server, i.e.
supports an agent trade server, the agent code must comply with the API and with
traﬃc regulations, such as the use of proxies. The agent trade server will usually
complement an electronic exchange system, in such a way that the core services are
unaﬀected, and should [?]:

—open up for proper best-eﬀort transport connectivity, fully in line with Internet

design foundations and contemporary trends in the industry

—prepare for the introduction of many new order details and tactical trading in-

structions

—provide a new level of containment to better defend the complex system from

fatal software error propagation when new services are introduced

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, October 2018, Pages 1–??.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

·

Once the agents are up and running on the server, the owner will require straight-
forward means to modifying, maintaining, and even manipulating her agents. She
can use various authenticated ways of reporting an update of her preferences, such
as encrypted mail, https-server commands, telephone calls with PIN-code login
procedures, etc. Such maintenance commands can be directed to the marketplace
owner or to a broker, but regardless there will be rules and perhaps costs for the
changes made. In the other direction, the owner will require reports on how her
agent is doing. It is pivotal that this data is disseminated with as little delay as
possible, as this data carries the information that might prompt changes to the
agent, or changes to the preferences of the owner.

We seek to complicate the picture further by focussing on roaming agent owners.
In section 2, we describe the problem and background to trading on-the-ﬂy.
In
section 3, we describe the sView architecture that to some extent provides the
solution. Since this is work in progress, we close with directions for future research.

2. ROAMING TRADING AGENT OWNERS

Agent trading in theory relaxes the agent owner from monitoring market data, but
in practice there will be long periods of intense trading, radical market changes,
preference changes, and other factors that will contribute to the need for full control.
Hence, the agent owners cannot aﬀord to be stationary, or even what is normally
referred to as mobile users. Instead they will be carrying with them the trading
services, and will expect at all times at least one channel of swift interaction means.
In practice, this could mean that the owner is carrying with her a portable com-
puter with a wireless LAN-card, together with all the necessary subscriptions and
payphone cards for use of hot spots. On that computer, a service in the form of a
running computer program will be activated.

A beneﬁt of having trading agents is the possibility to express higher-level inten-
tions, rather than explicit low-level orders. For stocks or commodities, this includes
repositioning a portfolio with respect to sectors, shifting from stocks to bonds or
vice versa, or acting on macro-economic information or news ﬂashes. To ﬁnd the
best venue for a trade, several market places must be monitored in advance to ﬁnd
the optimal combination of order book and liquidity, and optimizing only one of
the parameters will not suﬃce (cf. [?]). This is no trivial task, since varying trading
rules might have hard-to-foresee complications for the deal execution [?]. For large
deals, you would want the company’s most experienced trader to assist the agent,
regardless of her physical location at the time of the deal.

In the future, a work group collectively in charge of some important asset class
will need to dispatch responsibility for actions based on availability. The availability
should be ranked based on bandwidth available now and a forecast for the coming
period, as a complement to workforce capacity. Traditional work ﬂow models seem
not to account for this aspect of roaming. For instance, bi-directional roaming
access over several media may be required and as long as access networks are
heterogeneous and bandwidth constrained, an availability map must be maintained.
The best candidates for support of roaming agent owners are currently found among
personal service provision systems, where personal and group states and information
is preserved and maintained.

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, October 2018.

·

3

3. THE SVIEW SYSTEM
The sView System [?]
is among other things an environment for personal ser-
vices [?], some of which may be agents. Detailed descriptions can be found at the
system home page http://sview.sics.se. The system assumes a client/server
model, with server access being channeled through a virtual service briefcase. The
briefcase in turn supports access from many diﬀerent types of devices and user in-
terfaces. It is also private to an individual user, and it can store service components
containing both service logic and data from service providers. This allows the ser-
vice provider to split the services in two parts. One part provides commonly used
functionality and user-speciﬁc data that executes and is stored within the virtual
briefcase. The other part provides network-based functionality and data that is
common to all users. Finally, the service briefcase is mobile and it can follow its
user from host to host. This allows local and partially network-independent access
to the service components in the briefcase.

The core sView speciﬁcation constitutes an API that deﬁnes the basics of ser-
vice components and personal service environment handling.
It speciﬁes service
components, a runtime environment, a data structure for persistent and mobile im-
ages of service environments (service briefcases), and a server for handling service
briefcases. The speciﬁcation has been implemented as a set of Java packages. Ser-
vice components can implement an arbitrarily large part of the functionality of the
service, and range from mere proxies to web-based services, to standalone services.
They can be declared persistent and/or mobile. A persistent service component can
save its state together with the service environment when the environment is saved
locally on a host or migrates to another host in the network. If a service component
is mobile it will follow the service environment as it migrates to a diﬀerent host in
the network.

The entity maintaining and providing runtime support to service components is
the service context. Once the service components are loaded, the service context
controls and sets the states of the service components. For example, newly cre-
ated service components should be taken through an initialization state and when
the service environment is about to migrate, all service components should be sus-
pended. The service context is responsible for mediating service interfaces between
service components. It is straightforward to implement a message passing service
component on top of the core sView service/service communication scheme, and
the sView reference implementation includes such a service. Via the service con-
text, service components can control the behavior of the service environment (e.g.,
migration and shutdown) as well as the behavior of other service components (such
as creation, suspension, and resumption). However, since these activities are sensi-
tive matters, the user must grant privileges to each service component in order for
them to perform these actions. A service component may for example be granted
the privileges to create and load, but not suspend or kill, service components within
the environment. Another service component may be allowed to initiate a migra-
tion of the whole service environment to another host, but not to control any aspect
of individual service components.

A service briefcase server speciﬁes an API for service briefcase handling.
It
includes basic functionality such as create new, get, put, and delete briefcase. It

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, October 2018.

4

·

Web kiosk 

III 

HTML/HTTP

HTML UI to PSE

WML/WAP

IV

WML UI to PSE 

WML/HTTP

WAP Gateway

C

A

B

C

B

C

Service Briefcase

JPanel/SWING

GUI to PSE 

C

A

B

I

Service Briefcase Server 
with service environments 
for a single user 

II 

Service Briefcase Server 
with service environments 
for multiple users 

Fig. 1. Parts of the core sView speciﬁcation and its APIs.

also includes functionality for synchronization of content in diﬀerent instances of
a service briefcase on diﬀerent servers. Synchronization is used when a service
briefcase is to be moved to a server on which it has already been stored. In this case
it is possible that parts of the briefcase, such as service component speciﬁcations,
need not be sent with the briefcase. Synchronization is performed in two steps: the
ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd out the diﬀerence between the two service briefcases followed
by the second step to update the parts that have been changed. The two-phase
commit protocol is used to ensure data integrity during synchronization.

An illustration of the diﬀerent parts of the core sView speciﬁcation and their
relations is given in Fig. 1. On the computer marked I a briefcase server and
a service environment are executing. In this case the user is sitting next to the
same computer as the service environment (represented by the cloud together with
service components A, B, and C) is executing on. This makes it possible to use a
standard GUI for user-service interaction. The computer marked II hosts service
briefcases and environments for several users, which use remote interfaces. One
user is using a Web-kiosk with a Web browser for user-service interaction (III) and
another user uses a WAP phone (IV). Stored service environments, in the form of
service briefcases (illustrated between I and II), can migrate between any computers
that run a briefcase server.

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH

The sView system is a state-of-the-art tool for letting users develop and maintain
their electronic services. In particular, the system may be used as a tool for devel-

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, October 2018.

·

5

oping and maintaining services design to, in turn, monitor and manipulate agents
executing on an agent trade server. An example of such a service is graphical illus-
trations of trades conducted by an agent, or by a team of agents. Another example
is a tool for kill requests: should agent owner preferences change during the trading
day, means to remove an agent entirely from the agent trade server must be avail-
able. Whether this privilege is granted the agent owner, or only member brokers
for instance, is up to the marketplace owner to decide.

The sView system does not solve all problems resulting from roaming traders.
For example, the issue of hot login must be solved. A roaming trader wishes
independence from service providers, security mechanisms, and billing procedures.
A login, presumably at a predeﬁned priority level, should be sustained for as long
as possible, and with graceful degradation if necessary. We are currently looking
deeper into the case of sView being employed for roaming traders, and have begun
to write actual services.

We have also started work on the actual agent trade server speciﬁcation and
code. Since our long-term goal is to generalize our experiences from this case to
other domains, constructing a sandbox environment for trading agent development,
which can later be reused, is also on our agenda.

ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, October 2018.

