7
1
0
2
c
e
D
2
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
2
8
0
.
2
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Federated Control with Hierarchical Multi-Agent
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Saurabh Kumar∗
Georgia Tech
skumar311@gatech.edu

Pararth Shah∗
Google
pararth@google.com

Dilek Hakkani-Tür
Google
dilekh@ieee.org

Larry Heck
Google
larry.heck@ieee.org

Abstract

We present a framework combining hierarchical and multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning approaches to solve coordination problems among a multitude of
agents using a semi-decentralized model. The framework extends the multi-agent
learning setup by introducing a meta-controller that guides the communication be-
tween agent pairs, enabling agents to focus on communicating with only one other
agent at any step. This hierarchical decomposition of the task allows for efﬁcient
exploration to learn policies that identify globally optimal solutions even as the
number of collaborating agents increases. We show promising initial experimental
results on a simulated distributed scheduling problem.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning [3] can be applied to many real-world coordination problems, e.g.
network packet routing or urban trafﬁc control, to ﬁnd decentralized policies that jointly optimize the
private value functions of participating agents. However, multi-agent RL algorithms scale poorly with
problem size. Since communication possibilities increase quadratically as the number of agents, the
agents must explore a larger combined action space before receiving feedback from the environment.
In a separate line of research, hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) [4] has enabled learning
goal-directed behavior from sparse feedback in complex environments. HRL divides the overall task
into independent goals and trains a meta-controller to pick the next goal, while a controller learns to
reach individual goals. Consequently, HRL requires the task to be divisible into independent subtasks
that can be solved sequentially. Multi-agent problems do not directly ﬁt this criteria as a subtask
would entail coordination between multiple agents, each having partial observability on the global
state. Recently, [5] trained a pair of agents to negotiate and agree upon a joint action, but they do not
explore scaling to settings with many agents.

We propose Federated Control with Reinforcement Learning (FCRL), a framework for combining
hierarchical and multi-agent deep RL to solve multi-agent coordination problems with a semi-
decentralized model. Similar to HRL, the model consists of a meta-controller and controllers, which
are hierarchically organized deep reinforcement learning modules that operate at separate time scales.
In contrast to HRL, we modify the notion of a controller to characterize a decentralized agent which
receives a partial view of the state and chooses actions that maximize its private value function. The
model supports a variable number of controllers, where each controller is intrinsically motivated

∗Equal contribution. Work done while Saurabh Kumar interned at Google Research.

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning Workshop at the 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (HRL@NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Federated control model

to negotiate with another controller and agree upon a joint action under some constraints, e.g. a
division of available resources or a consistent schedule. The meta-controller chooses a sequence
of pairs of controllers that must negotiate with each other as well as a constraint provided to each
pair, and it is rewarded by the environment for efﬁciently surfacing a globally consistent set of
controller actions. Since a controller needs to communicate with a single other controller at any step,
the controller’s policy can be trained separately via self-play to maximize expected future intrinsic
reward with gradient descent. As the details of individual negotiations are abstracted away from the
meta-controller, it can efﬁciently explore the space of choices of controller pairs even as number of
controllers increases, and it is trained to maximize expected future extrinsic reward with gradient
descent.

FCRL can be applied to a variety of real-world coordination problems where privacy of agents’ data
is paramount. An example is multi-task dialogue with an automated assistant, where the assistant
must help a user to complete multiple interdependent tasks, for example making a plan to take a train
to the city, watch a movie and then get dinner. Each task requires querying a separate third-party
Web service which has a private database of availabilities, e.g. a train ticket purchase, a movie ticket
purchase or a restaurant table reservation service. Each Web service is a decentralized controller
which aims to maximize its utilization, while the assistant is a meta-controller which aims to obtain a
globally viable schedule for the user. Another example is urban trafﬁc control, where each vehicle is
a controller having a destination location that it desires to keep private. A meta-controller guides the
trafﬁc ﬂow through a grid of intersections, aiming to maintain a normal level of trafﬁc on all roads
in the grid. The meta-controller iteratively picks a pair of controllers and road segments, and the
controllers must negotiate with each other and assign different road segments among themselves.

In the next section, we formally describe the Federated RL model, and in Section 3 we mention
related work. In Section 4 we present preliminary experiments with a simulated multi-task dialogue
problem. We conclude with a discussion and present directions for future work in Section 5.

2 Model

Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems are characterized by an agent interacting with a dynamic
environment with the objective of maximizing a long term reward [10]. The basic RL model casts
the task as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) deﬁned by the tuple {S, A, T, R, γ} of states, actions,
transition function, reward, and discount factor.

Agents As in the h-DQN setting [4], we construct a two-stage hierarchy with a meta-controller and a
controller that operate at different temporal scales. However, rather than utilizing a single controller
which learns to complete multiple subtasks, FCRL employs multiple controllers, each of which learns
to communicate with another controller to collectively complete a prescribed subtask.

Temporal Abstractions As shown in Figure 1, the meta-controller receives a state st from the
environment and selects a subtask gt from the set of all subtasks and a constraint ct from the set
of all constraints. Constraints ensure that individual subtasks focus on disjoint parts of the overall
problem, allowing each problem to be solved independently by a subset of the controllers. The
meta-controller’s goal is to pick a sequence of subtasks and associated constraints to maximize the

2

cumulative discounted extrinsic reward provided by the environment. A subtask gt is associated with
two controllers, Ci and Cj, who must communicate with each other to complete the task. Ci and Cj
receive separate partial views of the environment state through states it and jt. For K − 1 time steps,
the subtask gt and constraint ct remain ﬁxed while Ci and Cj negotiate to decide on a set of output
actions, ai and aj, which are outputted at the Kth time step. The controllers are trained with an
intrinsic reward provided by an internal critic. The reward is shared between the controller pairs that
communicated with each other, and they are rewarded for choosing actions that satisfy the constraints
provided by the environment as well as the meta-controller.

3 Related Work

Multi-agent communication with Deep RL Multi-agent RL involves multiple agents that must
either cooperate or compete in order to successfully complete a task. A number of recent works have
demonstrated the success of this approach and have applied it to tasks in which agents communicate
with one another [2, 7, 9]. Two agents learned to communicate in natural language with one another
in order to complete a negotiation task in [5] and an image guessing task in [1]. The demonstrated
success of multi-agent communication is promising, but it may be difﬁcult to scale to greater numbers
of agents. In our work, we combine multi-agent RL with a meta-controller that selects subsets of
agents to communicate so that the overall task is optimally completed.

Hierarchical Deep RL The h-DQN algorithm [4] splits an agent into two components: a meta-
controller that selects subtasks to complete and a controller that selects primitive actions given a
subtask as input from the meta-controller. FCRL uses multiple controllers and extends the notion of a
subtask to involve a subset of the controllers that must collectively communicate to satisfy certain
constraints. Therefore, each controller can be pre-trained to complete a distinct goal and may receive
information only relevant for that particular goal. This is in contrast to the work by [4], which trains
a single controller to complete multiple subtasks.

Hierarchical Deep RL for dialogue In task-oriented dialogues, a dialogue agent assists a user in
completing a particular task, such as booking movie tickets or making a restaurant reservation.
Composite tasks are those in which multiple tasks must be completed by the dialogue agent. Recent
work by [8] applies the h-DQN technique to composite task completion. While this work successfully
trains agents on composite task dialogues, a drawback with the straightforward application of h-DQN
to dialogue is that only one goal is in focus at any given time, which must be completed prior to
another goal being addressed. This prevents the dialogue agent from handling cross-goal constraints.
The FCRL algorithm addresses cross-goal constraints by modeling a subtask as a negotiation between
two controllers that must simultaneously complete their individual goals.

4 Experiments

We present a preliminary experiment applying our method to a simulated distributed scheduling
problem. The goal is to validate our approach against baseline approaches in a controlled setup. We
plan to run further experiments on realistic scenarios in future work.

4.1 Environment

We consider a distributed scheduling problem which is inspired by the multi-domain dialogue
management setup described in the introduction. Formally, this consists of N agents, each having
a private database of available time entries, who must each pick a time such that the relative order
of times chosen by all agents is consistent with the order speciﬁed by the environment. At the start
of an episode, the environment randomly chooses m agents and provides an ordering2 of agents
C1, C2, . . . , Cm and agent databases D1, . . . , Dm, where Di is a bit vector of size B specifying the
times that are available to agent i. The agents can communicate amongst each other for K − 1 rounds,
after which each agent must output an action 0 ≤ ai < B. The environment emits a reward R = 1 if

2We model this directly as a sequence of agent IDs, but an extension is to generate or sample crowd-sourced
utterances for the constraints (“I want to watch a movie and get dinner. Also I’ll need a cab to get there.”) and
train the agents to parse the natural language into an agent order.

3

the actions a1, . . . am are such that a1 < a2 < . . . < am, and ai ∈ Di ∀i, else it emits a reward of
R = 0. In our setup we used N = 20, B = 8, and experimented with m ∈ {2, 4, 6}.

4.2 Agents

We evaluate three approaches for solving the distributed scheduling problem. Our proposed approach
(FCRL) consists of a meta-controller that picks a pair of controllers and a constraint vector, and
controller agents which communicate in pairs and output times that satisfy their private databases
as well as the meta-controller’s constraint. The two baselines, Multi-agent RL (MARL) and Hierar-
chical RL (HRL), compare our approach with the settings without a meta-controller or multi-agent
communication, respectively.

Federated Control (FCRL) We use an FCRL agent with K = 2 communication steps between
the controllers. Note that this means they communicate for K − 1 steps and then produce the
output actions at the Kth time step. The controller and meta-controller Q-networks have the same
structure with two hidden layers of sizes 100, 50, each followed by a tanh nonlinearity, and a ﬁnal
fully-connected layer outputting Q-values for each action. The controller has B actions, one for
each possible time value, and the meta-controller has B − 1 actions, corresponding to constraint
windows of sizes B/2j, j ∈ [0, logB]. (We assume that B is a power of 2.) The meta-controller
iterates through agent pairs in the order expected by the environment, and for the pair selected at time
t, it chooses a constraint vector ct. This constraint is applied to the two agents’ databases, and the
controllers then communicate with each other for K = 2 rounds. If the controllers are able to come
up with a valid order, they are rewarded by the intrinsic critic, and the meta-controller moves on to
the next pair. Otherwise, the meta-controller retries the same pair of controllers. The meta-controller
is given a maximum of 10 total invocations of controller pairs, after which the episode is terminated
with reward R = 0.

For a controller Ci communicating with another controller Cj, Ci’s state is a concatenation of the
database vector Di from the environment, a one-hot vector of size 2 denoting the position of that
agent in the relative order between Ci and Cj, and a communication vector of size B which is a
one-hot vector denoting Cj’s output in the previous round. (In the ﬁrst round the communication
vector is zeroed out.) The meta-controller’s state is a concatenation of a one-hot vector of size B
denoting the latest time entry that has been selected so far, and a multi-hot vector of size B − 1,
denoting the constraints that have been tried for the current controller pair.

Multi-agent RL (MARL) As a baseline, we consider a setup without a meta-controller, which is the
standard multi-agent setup where agents communicate with each other and emit individual actions.
The controller agent is same as that in FCRL, except that the position vector is a one-hot vector of
size m, denoting Ci’s position in the overall order, and the communication vector is an average of the
outputs of all other agents in the previous round, similar to CommNet described in [9].

Hierarchical RL (HRL) We also consider a Hierarchical RL baseline as described in [4]. The
controllers do not communicate with each other but instead independently achieve the task of emitting
a time value that is consistent with their database and the meta-controller’s constraint. The meta-
controller is the same as FCRL, except that it picks one agent at a time and assigns it a constraint
vector.

4.3 FCRL Training

Below, we present the pseudocode for training the FCRL agent.

All controllers share the same replay buffer and the same weights. Additionally, by randomly
sampling meta-controller constraints, the controllers can be pre-trained to communicate and complete
subtasks prior to the joint training as described above. In this case, Q2 will start with these pre-trained
weights rather than being initialized to be random in the above algorithm.

For the distributed scheduling task as described in the experiments, the Critic provides an intrinsic
reward rintrinsic = 1.0 only if (i) the controllers’ actions are valid according to their constrained
databases (ai ∈ Di ∧ ct and aj ∈ Dj ∧ ct), and (ii) the actions are in the correct order (ai < aj). For
N extControllerP air, we use the heuristic of emitting controller pairs in the order expected by the
environment: {(C1, C2), . . . , (CN −1, CN )}. Alternatively, a separate Q-network could be trained

4

Algorithm 1 Learning algorithm for FCRL agent
1: Initialize experience replay buffer RM for meta-controller and RC for the controllers
2: Intialize meta-controller’s Q-network, Q1, and controllers’ Q-network, Q2, with random weights
3: for episode = 1:N do
4:
5:

Environment selects m controllers C1, C2, ..., Cm with databases D1, D2, ..., Dm
s ← {dp, dt, tc} ← {φ, φ φ}

(cid:46) Meta-controller state is: done pairs (dp), done times (dt),

tried constraints (tc)

t ← 0
while s is not terminal do

Ci, Cj ← N extControllerP air(s)
ct ← epsilon_greedy(π(ct|s), (cid:15)M )
sCi ← {Di, ct, φ}
sCj ← {Dj, ct, φ}
for communication turn = 1:K do

ai ← epsilon_greedy(π(ai|sCi), (cid:15)Ci)
aj ← epsilon_greedy(π(aj|sCj), (cid:15)Cj)
s(cid:48)
Ci ← {Di, ct, aj}
s(cid:48)
Cj ← {Dj, ct, ai}
rintrinsic ← Critic(s, ai, aj)
Store transition (sCi, ai, rintrinsic, s(cid:48)
Store transition (sCj, aj, rintrinsic, s(cid:48)
sCi ← s(cid:48)
Ci
sCj ← s(cid:48)

Cj

Ci) in RC
Cj) in RC

Sample minibatch of transitions from RC and update Q2 weights
if rintrinsic > 0 then

(cid:46) Controller pair found a valid schedule

dp ← append(dp, (Ci, Cj))
dt ← append(dt, ai, aj)
tc ← φ

else

tc ← append(tc, ct)

s(cid:48) ← {dp, dt, tc}
re ← extrinsic reward from environment
Store transition (s, ct, re, s(cid:48)) in RM
Sample minibatch of transitions from RM and update Q1 weights
s ← s(cid:48)
t ← t + 1

6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:

22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:

to select controller pairs, which would be useful in domains where a sequencing of controllers for
pairwise communication is not manifest from the task description.

4.4 Results

We alternate training and evaluation for 1000 episodes each. Figure 2 plots the average reward on the
evaluation episodes over the course of training. Each curve is the average of 5 independent runs with
the same conﬁguration. We ran three experiments by varying m, i.e. the number of agents that are
part of the requested schedule and must communicate to come up with a valid plan.

For m = 2, all three approaches are able to ﬁnd the optimal policy as it requires only two agents
to communicate. For m = 4, HRL performs poorly as there is no inter-agent communication and
the meta-controller must do all the work of picking the right sequence of constraints to surface a
valid schedule. MARL does better as agents can communicate their preferences and get a chance to
update their choices based on what other agents picked. FCRL does better than both baselines, as
the meta-controller learns to guide the communications by constraining each pair of agents to focus
on disjoint slices of the database, while the controllers have to only communicate with one other
controller making it easy to agree upon a good pair of actions.

For m = 6, both HRL and MARL are unable to see a positive reward, as ﬁnding a valid schedule
requires signiﬁcantly more exploration for the meta-controller and controller, respectively. FCRL is

5

Figure 2: Comparing FCRL with baselines MARL and HRL, on three environments: (a) easy (m=2),
(b) medium (m=4), and (c) hard (m=6).

able to do better by dividing the problem into disjoint subtasks and leveraging temporal abstractions.
However, the meta-controller’s optimal policy is more intricate in this case, as it needs to learn to
start with smaller constraint windows and try larger ones if the smaller one fails, so that the earlier
agent pairs do not choose farther apart times when closer ones are possible.

5 Discussion

We presented a framework for combining hierarchical and multi-agent RL to beneﬁt from temporal
abstractions to reduce the communication complexity for ﬁnding globally consistent solutions with
distributed policies. Our experimental results show that this approach scales better than baseline
approaches as the number of communicating agents increases.

Future work The effect of increasing the size of the database or number of communication rounds
will be interesting to study. Multi-agent training creates a non-stationary environment for the agent
as other agents’ policies change over the course of training. While we employ the standard DQN
algorithm [6] to train the meta-controller, the controllers can be trained using recent policy gradient
based methods (eg. counterfactual gradients [3] ) which address this problem.

References

[1] A. Das, S. Kottur, J. Moura, and D. Batra. Learning cooperative visual dialog agents with deep

reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017.

[2] J. Foerster, Y. Assael, N. Freitas, and S. Whiteson. Learning to communicate with deep

multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv:1605.06676, 2016.

[3] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson. Counterfactual multi-agent

policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926, 2017.

[4] T. D. Kulkarni, K. Narasimhan, A. Saeedi, and J. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep reinforcement
learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 3675–3683, 2016.

[5] M. Lewis, D. Yarats, Y. Dauphin, D. Parikh, and D. Batra. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning
of negotiation dialogues. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 2433–2443, 2017.

[6] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller.

Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

[7] I. Mordatch and P. Abbeel. Emergence of compositional language in multi-agent populations.

arXiv:1703.04908, 2017.

[8] B. Peng, X. Li, L. Li, J. Gao, A. Celikyilmaz, S. Lee, and K.-F. Wong. Compos-
ite task-completion dialogue policy learning via hierarchical deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv:1704.03084, 2017.

[9] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation. In

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2244–2252, 2016.

[10] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press

Cambridge, 1998.

6

