A Systematic Approach to Artificial Agents 

Mark Burgin1 and Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic2 

1 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA,  
2 School of Innovation, Design and Engineering, Mälardalen University, Sweden,  

Abstract. Agents and agent systems are becoming more and more important in 
the  development  of  a  variety  of  fields  such  as  ubiquitous  computing,  ambient 
intelligence,  autonomous  computing, 
intelligent 
robotics. The need for improvement of our basic knowledge on agents is very 
essential. We take a systematic approach and present extended classification of 
artificial agents which can be useful for understanding of what artificial agents 
are and what they can be in the future. The aim of this classification is to give 
us  insights  in  what  kind  of  agents  can  be  created  and  what  type  of  problems 
demand a specific kind of agents for their solution. 

intelligent  systems  and 

Keywords:  Artificial  agents,  classification,  perception,  reasoning,  evaluation, 

mobility 

1   Introduction 

Agents  are  advanced  tools  people  use  to  achieve  different  goals  and  to  various 
problems.  The  main difference  between  ordinary  tools  and  agents  is  that  agents  can 
function more or less independently from those who delegated agency to the agents. 
For a long time people used only other people and sometimes animals as their agents. 
Developments  in  information  processing  technology,  computers  and  their  networks, 
have made possible to build and use artificial agents. Now the most popular approach 
in artificial intelligence is based on agents.   

Intelligent agents form a basis for many kinds of advanced software systems that 
incorporate  varying  methodologies,  diverse  sources  of  domain  knowledge,  and  a 
variety of data types. The intelligent agent approach has been applied extensively in 
business applications, and more recently in medical decision support systems [12, 13] 
and ecology [15]. In the general paradigm, the human decision maker is considered to 
be  an  agent  and  is  incorporated  into  the  decision  process.  The  overall  decision  is 
facilitated  by  a  task  manager  that  assigns  subtasks  to  the  appropriate  agent  and 
combines conclusions reached by agents to form the final decision.  

 
2   The Concept of an Agent 

There  are  several  definitions  of  intelligent  and  software  agents.  However,  they 
task,  autonomy,  and 
in 
describe  rather 
communication capabilities. Some of the major definitions and descriptions of agents 
are given in Jansen [7]. 

than  define  agents 

terms  of 

their 

1.  Agents  are  semi-autonomous  computer  programs  that  intelligently  assist  the  user 
with computer applications by employing artificial intelligence techniques to assist 
users  with  daily  computer  tasks,  such  as  reading  electronic  mail,  maintaining  a 
calendar,  and  filing  information.  Agents  learn  through  example-based  reasoning 
and are able to improve their performance over time.  

2.  Agents  are  computational  systems 

that 

inhabit  some  complex,  dynamic 

environment, and sense and act autonomously to realize a set of goals or tasks.  
3.  Agents are software robots that think and act on behalf of a user to carry out tasks. 
Agents will help meet the growing need for more functional, flexible, and personal 
computing  and  telecommunications  systems.  Uses  for  intelligent  agents  include 
self-contained  tasks,  operating  semi-autonomously,  and  communication  between 
the user and systems resources.  

4.  Agents  are  software  programs  that  implement  user  delegation.  Agents  manage 
complexity, support user mobility, and lower the entry level for new users. Agents 
are  a  design  model  similar  to  client-server  computing,  rather  than  strictly  a 
technology, program, or product.  

Franklin  and  Graesser  [4]  have  collected  and  analyzed  a  more  extended  list  of 
definitions:  

An  agent  is  anything  that  can  be  viewed  as  perceiving  its  environment  through 
sensors  and  acting  upon  that  environment  through  effectors,  Russel  and  Norvig, 
[10]. 

Autonomous agents are computational systems that inhabit some complex dynamic 
environment,  sense  and  act  autonomously  in  this  environment.  By  doing  so  they 
realize a set of goals or tasks for which they are designed, Maes, [8]. 

Let us define an agent as a persistent software entity dedicated to a specific purpose. 
'Persistent'  distinguishes  agents  from  subroutines;  agents  have  their  own  ideas 
about how  to accomplish  tasks,  their  own agendas.  'Special  purpose'  distinguishes 
them  from  entire  multifunction  applications;  agents  are  typically  much  smaller, 
Smith, Cypher and Spohrer, [11]. 

Intelligent  agents  continuously  perform  three  functions:  perception  of  dynamic 
conditions  in  the  environment;  action  to  affect  conditions  in  the  environment;  and 
reasoning to interpret perceptions, solve problems, draw inferences, and determine 
actions, Hayes-Roth, [5]. 

Intelligent  agents  are  software  entities  that  carry  out  some  set  of  operations  on 
behalf  of  a  user  or  another  program,  with  some  degree  of  independence  or 

 
 
autonomy, and in so doing, employ some knowledge or representation of the user's 
goals or desires [6]. 

An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a part of an environment that 
senses that environment and acts on it, over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and 
so as to effect what it senses in the future, Franklin and Graesser, [4]. 

However,  as  we  mentioned  in  the  Introduction,  there  are  also  natural  and  social 
agents.  For  instance,  the  term  “agent”  in  the  context  of  business  or  economic 
modeling  refers  to  natural  real  world  objects,  such  as  organizations,  companies  or 
people.  These  real  world  objects  are  capable  of  displaying  autonomous  behavior. 
They  react  to  external  events  and  are  capable  of  initiating  activities  and  interaction 
with other objects (agency).  

Thus, it is reasonable to assume that an agent is anything (or anybody) that can be 
viewed  as  perceiving  its  environment  through  sensors  and  acting  upon  this 
environment  through  effectors.  A  human  agent  has  eyes,  ears,  and  other  organs  for 
sensors,  and  hands,  legs,  mouth,  and other body  parts  for  effectors.  A  robotic  agent 
uses cameras, infrared range finders and other sensing devices as sensors and various 
body  parts  as  effectors.  A  software  agent  has  communication  channels  both  for 
sensors and effectors.  

This  gives  us  the  following  informational  structure  of  an  agent,  reflecting  agent’s 
information flows: 

Raw information  Descriptional information  Prescriptional information 

Receptor(s) 

Processor(s) 

Effector(s) 

Fig. 1. The triadic informational structure of an agent. 

3   Agent Typology 

There  are  different  types  of  intelligent  agents.  For  instance,  Russel  and  Norvig  [10] 
consider four types: 

1.  Simple reflex (or tropistic, or behavioristic) agents. 

2.  Agents that keep track of the world. 

3.  Goal-based agents. 

4.  Utility-based agents. 

 
 
The general structure of the world in the form of the Existential Triad gives us three 
classes of agents: 

-  Physical agents. 

-  Mental agents.  

-  Structural or information agents. 

People, animals, and robots are examples of physical agents. Software agents and Ego 
in the sense of psychoanalysis are examples of mental agents. The head of a Turing 
machine (cf., for example, Burgin, [3]) is an example of a structural agent. 
Physical agents belong to three classes: 

-  Biological agents. 

-  Artificial agents. 

-  Hybrid agents. 

People,  animals,  and  microorganisms  are  examples  of  biological  agents.  Robots  are 
examples  of  artificial  agents.  Hybrid  agents  consist  of  biological  and  artificial  parts 
(cf., for example, Venda, [14]). 

Mizzaro  [9]  classifies  agents  according  to  three  parameters.  With  respect  to 
perception,  he  identifies  perceiving  agents  with  various  perception  levels.  Complete 
perceiving agents, who have complete perception of the world, constitute the highest 
level  of  perceiving  agents.  Opposite  to  perceiving  agents,  there  are  no  perception 
agents, which are completely isolated from their environment. This does not correlate 
with  the  definition  of  Russell  and  Norvig  [10]  but  it  is  consistent  with  a  general 
definition of an agent. 

With  respect  to  reasoning,  there  are  reasoning  agents  with  various  reasoning 
capabilities.  Reasoning  agents  derive  new  knowledge  items  from  their  existing 
knowledge state. On the highest level of reasoning agents, we have omniscient agents, 
which are capable of making actual all their potential knowledge by logical reasoning. 
Opposite to reasoning agents, Mizzaro [9] identifies nonreasoning agents, which are 
unable to derive new knowledge items from the existing knowledge they possess.  

With respect to memory, there are permanent memory agents, which are capable of 
never  losing  any  portions  of  their  knowledge.  No  memory  agents  are  opposite  to 
permanent  memory  agents  because they  cannot  keep  their  knowledge  state.  Volatile 
memory agents are between these two categories. People are volatile memory agents. 
Here we suggest seven classifications of agents based on attributive dimensions of 

agents.  

According to the cognitive/intelligence criterion, there are: 

1.  Reflex (or tropistic, or behavioristic) agents, which realize the simple schema 

action → reaction. 

2.  Model based agents, which have a model of their environment. 

3.  Inference based agents, which use inference in their activity. 

4.  Predictive  (prognostic,  anticipative)  agents,  which  use  prediction  in  their 

activity. 

5.  Evaluation based agents, which use evaluation in their activity. 

Some of these classes are also considered in Russell and Norvig [10]. 

Note that prediction and/or evaluation do not necessarily involve inference. 

In addition, according to the dynamic criterion, there are: 

1.  static  agents,  which  do  not  move  (at  least,  by  themselves),  e.g.,  desktop 

computer;  

2.  mobile agents, which can move to some extent of freedom; 

3.  effector mobile agents, which have effectors that can move;  

4.  receptor (sensor) mobile agents, which have receptors that can move.  

Note that mobility can be realized on different levels and in different degrees.  

According to the interaction criterion, there are:  

1.  deliberative  (proactive)  agents,  which  try  to  anticipate  what  is  going  to 
happen in their environment and to organize their activity taking into account 
these predictions; 

2.  reactive agents, which react to changes in the environment; 

3. 

inactive agents, which do the same thing independently of what happens in 
the environment. 

According to the autonomy criterion, there are:  

1.  autonomous agents;  

2.  dependent agents; 

3.  controlled agents.  

There are many kinds and levels of dependence. Control is considered as the highest 
level of dependence. 

According to the learning criterion, there are:  

1. 

learning agents do not learn at all; 

2.  remembering agents realize the lowest level of learning – remembering or 

memorizing 

3.  conservative agents, do not learn at all.  

According to the cooperation criterion, there are:  

1.  competitive agents, do not collaborate but only compete;  

2. 

individualistic agents, which do not interact with other agents; 

3.  collaborative agents.  

There are many kinds and levels of competition. For instance, it can be competition 
by any cost or competition according to definite (e.g., moral) rules or/and principles. 
Collaboration also can take different forms. 

There are many kinds and levels of dependence. Control is considered as the highest 
level of dependence. 

According to the learning criterion, there are:  

1. 

learning agents do not learn at all; 

2.  remembering agents realize the lowest level of learning – remembering or 

memorizing 

3.  conservative agents, do not learn at all.  

There is one more dimension (criterion for classification), which underlies all others. 
It  is  the  algorithmic  dimension.  Indeed,  an  agent  can  perform  operations  (e.g., 
building a model of the environment or making evaluation) and actions (e,g., moving 
from one place to another) in different modes and using various types of algorithms. 

According to the learning criterion, there are:  

1.  subrecursive  agents  use  only  subrecursive  algorithms,  e.g.,  finite 

automata; 

2.  recursive  agents  can  use  any  recursive  algorithms,  such  as  Turing 
machines,  random  access  machines,  Kolmogorov  algorithms  or  Minsky 
machines; 

3.  super-recursive  agents  can use  some  super-recursive  algorithms,  such  as 

inductive Turing machines or trial-and-error machines.  

The  difference  between  recursive  and  super-recursive  agents  is  that  at  some 
moment after receiving or formulating a task and starting to fulfill it, a recursive agent 
will  stop  and  inform  that  the  task  is  fulfilled.  In  a  similar  situation,  super-recursive 
agent  can  fulfill  tasks  that  do  not  demand  stopping.  For  instance,  a  program  of  a 
satellite  computer  which  performs  observations  of  changes  in  the  atmosphere  for 
weather prediction has to do observations all time because there is no such a moment 
when  all  these  observations  are  completed.  As  a  result,  super-recursive  agents  can 
perform much more tasks and solve much more problems than recursive agents (cf., 
for example, [2]). 

A  cognitive  agent  has  a  system  of  knowledge  K.  Such  an  agent  perceives 
information from the world and it changes the initial knowledge state, i.e., the state of 
the system K. 

In  general,  agents  may  be  usefully  classified  according  to  the  subset  of  these 
properties that they enjoy, Franklin and Graesser, [4]. When properties are organized 
in  definite  classes,  it  is  possible  to  use  sub-classification  schemes  via  control 
structures, via environments (database, file system, network, Internet), via language or 
via  applications.  For  instance,  distinction  between  data-based  and  knowledge-based 
agents  is  based  on  such  part  of  agent  environment  as  the  source  of  information. 
Generalizing  the  approach  of  Franklin  and  Graesser  [4],  we  can  classify  agents  by 

their  internal  and  external  components.  For  instance,  control  structure  is  an  internal 
component,  while  a  source  of  information  is  an  external  component.  A  slightly 
different approach to the taxonomy of agent properties is based on aspect of an agent, 
for example, on agent functions. Thus, separation of signal and image analysis agents 
is related to agent functions. Brustoloni [1] offers another classification by functions: 
regulation, planning and adaptive agents. 

Different  types  of  automata  can  be  associated  with  the  types  of  agents.  Reflex 
agents may be modeled by automata without memory, such as may be represented by 
decision  tables.  All  other  types  of  agents  demand  memory.  The  third  and  higher 
levels, in addition, need a sufficiently powerful processor, varying by the level of the 
agent. Agents that perform simple tasks may use a finite automaton processor. More 
sophisticated  agents  demand  processors  that  perform  inference  and  have  the 
computational  power  of  Turing  machines.  Processors  and  program  systems  for 
intelligent agents have to utilize super-recursive automata and algorithms, Burgin, [3]. 

Conclusions 

Agency  and  agent-based  solutions  for  a  wide  variety  of  classes  of  problems  is 
becoming  more  and  more  interesting  and  important  as  we  face  situations  of 
ubiquitous  computing,  ambient  intelligence,  autonomous  computing,  intelligent 
systems  and  intelligent  robotics  –  to  name  but  a  few  issues.  In  this  paper,  we 
presented  an  extended  classification  of  artificial  agents  as  a  contribution  to  a 
systematic approach. The aim of this classification is to better understand what kinds 
of agents can be created and what type of problems demand a specific kind of these 
agents  for  their  solution.  The  need  for  improvement  of  our  basic  understanding  of 
what agents are, what they can do and what they can be made to be and to do is very 
essential for our civilization. 

References 

1.  Brustoloni, J.C.: Autonomous Agents: Characterization and Requirements, Carnegie Mellon 

Technical Report CMU-CS-91-204, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University (1991) 

2.  Burgin,  M.:  Nonlinear  Phenomena  in  Spaces  of  Algorithms,  International  Journal  of 

Computer Mathematics, v. 80, No. 12, pp. 1449-1476      (2003) 

3.  Burgin, M.: Super-recursive Algorithms, Springer, New York/Berlin/Heidelberg (2005) 
4.  Franklin, S., Graesser A.: Is it an Agent, or just a Program?: A Taxonomy for Autonomous 
Agents,  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Third  International  Workshop  on  Agent  Theories, 
Architectures, and Languages, Springer-Verlag (1996) 

5.  Hayes-Roth,  B.:  An  Architecture  for  Adaptive  Intelligent  Systems.  Artificial  Intelligence: 

Special Issue on Agents and Interactivity, 72, 329-365 (1995) 

6.  IBM's Intelligent Agent Strategy white paper,  

http://activist.gpl.ibm.com:81/WhitePaper/ptc2.htm  

 
7.  Jansen,  J.:  Using  Intelligent  Agents  to  Enhance Search  Engine  Performance,  Firstmonday, 

No.2/3, http://www.firstmonday.dk (1996) 

8.  Maes,  P.:  Artificial  Life  Meets  Entertainment:  Life 

like  Autonomous  Agents, 

Communications of the ACM, 38, 11, 108--114 (1995) 

9.  Mizzaro,  S.:  Towards  a  theory  of  epistemic  information.  Information  Modelling  and 

Knowledge Bases, IOS Press, v. 12, Amsterdam, 1--20 (2001) 

10.  Russel,  S.J.  and  Norvig,  P.:  Artificial  Intelligence:  A  Modern  Approach,  Prentice-Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1995) 

11.  Smith,  D.  C.:  Cypher  A.,  Spohrer  J.:  KidSim:  Programming  Agents  without  a 

Programming Language, Communications of the ACM, 37, 7, 55--6. (1994)  

12.  Hsu  C.,  Goldberg  H.S.:  Knowledge-mediated  retrieval  of  laboratory  observations,  Proc. 

JAMIA, v.23:809--813(1999)  

13.  Lanzola  G.,  Gatti  L.,  Falasconi  S.,  Stefanelli  M.:  A  framework  for  building  cooperative 
software agents in medical applications, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 16, 223--249. 
(1999)  

14.  Venda, V.F.: Hybrid Intelligence Systems: Evolution, Psychology, Informatics. (Machine 

Engineering Industry - Mashinostroenie, Moscow). (In Russian) (1990)  

15. Judson, O.P.: The Rise of the Individual-based model in Ecology, Trends in Ecology and 

Evolution, 9, 9-14 (1994) 

 
 
