JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

1

Fact-based Agent modeling for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Baofu Fang, Caiming Zheng and Hao Wang

3
2
0
2

t
c
O
8
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
9
2
2
1
.
0
1
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In multi-agent systems, agents need to interact and
collaborate with other agents in environments. Agent modeling
is crucial to facilitate agent interactions and make adaptive
cooperation strategies. However, it is challenging for agents to
model the beliefs, behaviors, and intentions of other agents
in non-stationary environment where all agent policies are
learned simultaneously. In addition, the existing methods realize
agent modeling through behavior cloning which assume that
the local information of other agents can be accessed during
execution or training. However, this assumption is infeasible
in unknown scenarios characterized by unknown agents, such
as competition teams, unreliable communication and federated
learning due to privacy concerns. To eliminate this assumption
and achieve agent modeling in unknown scenarios, Fact-based
Agent modeling (FAM) method is proposed in which fact-based
belief inference (FBI) network models other agents in partially
observable environment only based on its local information. The
reward and observation obtained by agents after taking actions
are called facts, and FAM uses facts as reconstruction target
to learn the policy representation of other agents through a
variational autoencoder. We evaluate FAM on various Multiagent
Particle Environment
(MPE) and compare the results with
several state-of-the-art MARL algorithms. Experimental results
show that compared with baseline methods, FAM can effectively
improve the efficiency of agent policy learning by making adap-
tive cooperation strategies in multi-agent reinforcement learning
tasks, while achieving higher returns in complex competitive-
cooperative mixed scenarios.

Index Terms—Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning, Multi-

agent Systems, Agent Modeling.

I. INTRODUCTION

R EINFORCEMENT Learning (RL) has achieved rapid

progress in cooperative and competitive multi-agent
games, such as OpenAI Five[1] and AlphaStar[2]. In multi-
agent environments, agents must
interact with each other,
where the interaction relationship includes competition and
cooperation. Due to the policy of all agents are simulta-
neously learning, it affects the state transitions and reward
functions experienced by an individual agent[3]. From the
perspective of a single agent, interacting with other agents
whose policies change makes the environment non-stationary.
Therefore, other agents cannot be simply treated as part of the
environment. Agent modeling promotes the agent to adjust its
own policy to adapt to the policy changes of other agents by

Manuscript received 4, June 2023. This work was supported by the Univer-
sity Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province (Grant No.GXXT-2022-
055), Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Flight Techniques and Flight Safety,
CAAC (Grant No.FZ2022KF09), and the R&D Program of Key Laboratory
of Flight Techniques and Flight Safety, CAAC(Grant No.FZ2022ZZ02).

The authors are with the School of Computer Science and Information
Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230601, China (e-mail:
fangbf@hfut.edu.cn; 2502282770@@qq.com; jsjwangh@hfut.edu.cn).

explicitly modeling the beliefs, behaviors and intentions of
other agents[4]. Since the agent learns in the same partially
observable environment while other agents whose strategies
are complex, diverse, and time-varying. Therefore, modeling
other agents in non-stationary environments is a major chal-
lenge for multi-agent reinforcement learning.

Traditional agent modeling assumes that agents can access
the local information of other agents during execution and
including the local observations and
training[4], [5], [6],
actions taken by other agents. However, this assumption often
does not hold in many multi-agent scenarios. In practical,
agents may have limited visibility of their surrounding en-
vironment and communication with competing agents may be
prohibited, while communication between cooperating agents
is often unreliable[7], for example in federated learning tasks.
In such situations, agents must inference and make decisions
based on their local information. To weaken this assumption,
information of
LIAM[8] and SMA2C[9] utilize the local
agents, including their own observations, actions, and rewards,
to infer the representations of other agents in a recurrent man-
ner. These methods relax the assumption of traditional agent
modeling by allowing access to the local information of other
agents only during the training stage. However, in unknown
scenarios, agents may also be prohibited from accessing the
information of other agents during both execution and training
stages. It is infeasible for behavior cloning-based approaches
to explicitly minimize the difference between an agent’s policy
model and the true policy. Therefore, the agent modeling in
this case requires the agent to rely on its own local information,
that is, it does not access the local information of other agents
during the training and execution phases.

Consider a simple real-world scenario as shown in Figure
1, where the fruits collection task requires three people (Alice,
Bob and Carol) to collect three fruits include apples, oranges,
and pears with the shortest time. In order to achieve this
task without communication, each person should go through
four stages: 1).Preliminary decision making, 2).Observing and
inferring, 3).Interacting, 4).Repeating steps 2) and 3) to avoid
conflits and achieve collaborative consensus until the fruits
collection task is complete. In this process, each person needs
to start from the recent observation to infer other person policy
representations to help itself make adaptive decisions. At the
same time, the facts that happened after decision making are
used to verify the inference result. In multi-agent systems, the
rewards and observation received by the agent after performing
the action imply rich information about the actions of other
agents at the same moment.

Based on this viewpoint, We propose Fact-based Agent

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

2

Fig. 1. Fruit collection example. Everyone needs to cooperate to collect three konds of fruits which are apple, orange, and pear in shortest possible time. The
whole process of fruit collection can be divided into 4 stages: 1).Preliminary decision making: Observing the surrounding environment, independently select
fruits, and making effective decisions. 2).Observing and inferring: Observing information related others and inferring their behavioral intentions. 3).Interacting:
Making adaptive decisions based on the inferred results to interact with environment and other agents and verifying the previous inferences through the fact
of consequences after decisions. 4).Repeating steps 2). and 3). to avoid cooperative goal conflicts and achieve collaborative consensus until the fruit collection
task is completed.

Modeling (FAM) for multi-agent learning, which eliminates
the assumption of accessing local information of other agents
during execution and training phases. We build fact-based
belief inference (FBI) network to model other agents based
on own local information which is a variational autoEncoder
(VAE) that has the advantage of being able to compensate
for the information difference between the execution and
training phases. The difference from the existing work is that
SMA2C[9] adopts the method of behavior cloning during
training phase. Howerver, in this paper, the reward signal
containing global information and the observation of local
information received by the agent after performing the action
are used as the reconstruction target. The proposed FAM
is suitable for non-stationary and partially observable envi-
ronments. In addition, the complexity of agent modeling of
SMA2C[9] and LIAM[8] is O(N ) while FAM is O(1) that
is independent of the number of agents. FAM is also more
suitable for unknown scearios. The main contributions of this
article as follows.

1) In order to elimate the assumption of accessing the local
information of other agents for agent modeling, fact-
based belief inference (FBI) network is proposed, which
models other agents based on own local information
using variational autoencoder.

2) Combining FBI with Actor-Critc, Fact-based Agent
Modeling (FAM) is proposed for multi-agent learning,
which learns adaptive collaboration strategies by con-
sidering the policies of other agents. It can effectively
applicable to partially observable environments.

3) Extensive experimental was conducted to verify the
effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed FAM, and
analyze the information encoded by FBI.

The remainder of this article is organised as follows. Section
II describes the background of deep reinforcement learning
and variational autoencoder. Section III reviews the related
work about multi-agent reinforcement
learning and agent
modeling. Section IV presents the proposed FBI and FAM.
Section V describes the detailed results and analysis of the
experiments. Ultimately, conclusions are provided in Section
VI.

II. NOTATION AND BACKGROUND

It

The fully cooperative multi-agent

task can be modeled
as a decentralized partially observable Markov decision
process(Dec-POMDP)[10].
is represented by the tuple
G =< I, S, U, P, r, Z, O, γ >, where I = {1, 2, ..., n} is a
finite set of agents, and n represents the number of agents.
s ∈ S describes the global state of the environment. At each
timestep t, each agent a ∈ I receives an observation oa
t ∈ O
through the observation function Z(s, a) : S × I → O and
selects an action ua
t , forming a joint action ut ∈ U. After
executing the actions, the agents receive rewards signal rt,
where all agents share the same reward function r(s, u) :
S × U → R, and transition to the next state according to
transition probability function P (s′|s, u) : S × U × S → [0, 1].
The action-observation history of each agent is denoted as
τ a ∈ T ≡ (O × U)∗, and the policy π(ua
1:t; θa) :
T × U → [0, 1]
is based on its own action-observation
history, with policy parameters θa. The goal of Dec-POMDP
is to learn a joint policy π = (π1, ..., πn) that maximizes
the team cumulative discounted return Rt = (cid:80)∞
l=0 γlrt+l,
where γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. The joint action-
value function of the joint policy π is denoted as Qπ(st, ut) =
Est+1:∞,ut+1:∞ [Rt|st, ut], the joint state-value function is de-

t |τ a

ABCABCAlice wants to collect oranges, if so, then she will be closer to oranges!Bob wants to collect oranges, but I am faster than him!ABCOrange is closest to me and I will collect it.Apple is closest to me and I will collect it.Orange is closest to me and I will collect it.ABCAlice is closer to the orange, I am sure she wants to collect them, but she is faster than me. Also, Carol wants to collect apple, so I am going to collect pear.Step 1. Preliminary decision makingStep 2. Observing and inferringStep 3. InteractingStep 4. Repeating Steps 2). and 3)JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

3

noted as V π(st) = Est+1:∞, ut:∞ [Rt|st], and the advantage
function is denoted as Aπ(st, ut) = Qπ(st, ut) − V π(st).
Policy Gradient: Vanilla Policy Gradient (REINFORCE) is
an on-policy algorithm that directly uses a parameterized
model[11] to approximate the policy π(ut|st; θ). REINFORCE
does not require a separate behavior policy because πθ(ut|st)
naturally explores and exploits the environment. The policy
parameters θ are updated at each step by increasing the log-
likelihood of the chosen actions with respect to the sampled
trajectory return Rt. The gradient update direction is given by:
g = Et [∇θ log π(ut|st; θ)Rt]

(1)

The baseline bt(st)[12] is subtracted from the return to
reduce the variance of the estimated return while remaining
unbiased, and the gradient update direction becomes:

g = Et [∇θ log π(ut|st; θ)(Rt − bt(st))]

(2)

This allows for more stable learning and potentially faster
convergence. The baseline can be a value function estimate
or a learned function that approximates the expected return at
state st.
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C): A2C is an on-policy Actor-
Critic method that utilizes parallel environments to break the
correlation between consecutive samples. It introduces a state
value function estimator Vw(st) to approximate the state value
E [Rt|st], and used as a baseline to reduce the variance of
sampling returns to improve policy gradient updates. Since
Q(st, ut) is an approximate estimate of Rt, A(st, ut) = Rt −
V (st) is expressed as the advantage of action at under state st,
then the direction of A2C policy gradient update is as follows,
g = Et [∇θ log π(ut|st; θ)(A(st, ut))]

(3)

By using the advantage function A(st, ut), A2C facilitates
more stable and efficient learning. And the loss function for
the state value function is given by:

La2c(ω) = E(st,ut,rt+1,st+1)∼B(Rt − Vω(st))2

(4)

where B denotes the sampled batch trajectory.
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO): PPO is an Actor-Critic
algorithm whose core idea is to achieve stable training by
limiting the distance between old and new policies. The PPO
algorithm uses a loss function called "clipped surrogate objec-
tive" to control the step size of policy update, thus achieving
stability in training without slowing down the training speed.
Unlike A2C, PPO employs a technique called importance
sampling, which allows multiple gradient descent updates to
be performed using the same batch of trajectories. The loss
function of actor for PPO as follows:
Lppo(θ) = Eτ ∼B [min(rt(θ), clip(ratiot(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ))At]
(5)
where ratiot(θ) = πθ(ut|st)
πθold (ut|st) represents the ratio between the
new and old policies, and ϵ is a hyperparameter used to control
the difference between the new and old policies. Compared to
A2C, PPO has a higher sample efficiency.
Variational Autoencoder (VAE): VAE is a generative model
used to approximate the true posterior distribution p(z|x),
where the dataset samples X = {xi}N
i=1 are generated from an

unknown parameterized generative distribution p(x|z; θ) with
the latent variable z being unobserved. The prior distribution
of the latent variable z is assumed to be a Gaussian distribution
p(z) = N (z; 0, I) with mean 0 and variance 1. The goal of
VAE is to learn a variational distribution q(z|x; ϕ) parameter-
ized by ϕ to approximate the true posterior distribution p(z|x),
where q(z|x; ϕ) = N (z; µ, σ, ϕ) is a Gaussian distribution
with mean µ and variance σ.

Variational inference uses the KL divergence as a distance
measure function to minimize the distance between the ap-
proximate posterior distribution q(z|x; ϕ) and the true poste-
rior distribution p(z|x) , the Evidence Lower Bound(ELBO)
as follows:
log p(x) ≥ ELBO(ψ, ϕ|x)

= Ez∼q(z|x;ϕ) [log p(x|z; ψ) − DKL(q(z|x; ϕ)||p(z))]
(6)
where DKL represents the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
The first term on the right-hand side of the equation is the
reconstruction loss, which measures the quality of the gener-
ated samples. The second term is a regularization term, which
is used to constrain the distribution of the latent variables.
Higgins et al.[13] proposes β-VAE, where the parameter β ≥ 0
is used to balance the reconstruction loss and the regularization
term. The overall optimization objective of the β-VAE is as
follows:
Lvae(ϕ, ψ) = Ez∼qϕ [log p(x|z; ψ) − βDKL(q(z|x; ϕ)||p(z))]
(7)

III. RELATED WORK

Multi-agent system (MAS) consists of multiple agents in-
teracting in the shared environment to accomplish tasks. For
complex tasks, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
enables agents to learn effective policies through interaction
with the environment. One of the main challenges in MARL
is the inherent non-stationarity of the environment where all
agents learn simultaneousl. Since the policies of other agents
are unknown, it is unstable for agents to learn policies if
they are considered part of the environment. To address this
challenge, one approach is to adopt the Centralized Training
with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) framework, where a
centralized Critic is used to approximate joint action value or
state-action value to guide the policy learning of individual
agents. The value-based methods include QMIX[14], OW-
QIX[15], and TransfQMIX[16] and the Actor-Critic-based
methods such as MADDPG[17] and MAAC[18].

Another approach to address

the challenge of non-
stationarity in MARL is agent modeling, which mitigates
the effect of non-stationarity by incorporating information
about other agents’ beliefs, behaviors, and intentions. Many
studies on agent modeling rely on predicting the actions or
goals of other agents during training. He et al.[5] proposed a
behavior cloning-based agent modeling approach that uses a
neural network to predict the actions executed by other agents
based on their observations. Hernandez-Leal et al.[19] treated
learning other non-learning agents’ policy as an auxiliary
task and simplified it to a standard single-agent reinforcement
learning problem. Similarly, Georgios et al.[8] used an encoder

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

4

to construct representations of other agents based on their
local information in a recurrent manner, while the decoder
reconstructed the observations and actions of other agents.
Another method[9] applied a variational autoencoder for agent
modeling, where the encoder generates a high-dimensional
continuous distribution as a representation of the other agent’s
policy, and the decoder is trained by reconstructing the agent’s
actions. Both of these methods allow access to other agents’
local information during the training or execution.

In terms of considering simultaneously learning opponents,
Foerster et al.[20] proposed LOLA, which incorporates the
influence of an agent’s policy on the parameter updates of
other agents’ policies. Al-Shedivat et al.[21] introduced Mate-
PG, a meta-policy gradient-based method that leverages the
trajectories of other agents in multiple meta-gradient steps to
construct a policy that benefits from updating other agents.
Kim et al.[22] proposed an extension to the existing method
called Meta-MAPG. They introduced an additional term that
captures the influence of an agent’s current policy on the
future policies of other agents, similar to LOLA. These meta-
learning-based methods require the trajectory distributions to
match between training and testing, implicitly assuming that
all other agents use the same learning algorithm.

Unlike existing work, we consider a more complex and
general setting where the policies of other agents are learned
simultaneously with the agent’s own policy. Furthermore, there
is partial observability in multi-agent environment, and the
agents are not allowed to access the local information of other
agents to achieve agent modeling during the execution and
training.

IV. METHODS

In this section, we introduce a Fact-based Agent Modeling
(FAM) Algorithm as shown in Figure 2, which completely
eliminates the assumption that
traditional agent modeling
information during the
allow access to other agents local
training or execution phases. Firstly, we provide the structure
and details of fact-based belief inference module (FBI). Fur-
thermore, we present the optimization objective and training
procedure for FAM.

A. Fact-based Belief Inference

To enable an agent to interact with other agents and learn
adaptive policy, it needs to infer the current policies of the
interacting agents. Fact-based Belief Inference (FBI) elim-
inates the assumption that agents can access other agents’
local information during training or execution. This module
extracts policy representation denoted as zi of other agent
from the interaction trajectories of agent i, including triplets
of observations, actions, and rewards triplets. Policy repre-
sentations are learned from facts acquired by the agent after
performing actions. The extracted representation zi denotes
agent i’s beliefs about other agents, i.e., estimates of their
policy. This introduces uncertainty of other agents’ policies
1:t, zi).
into agent i’s policy πi(ai
Assuming the joint policy of other agents are unobservable
variables zi in the latent space Z i for agent i, and the latent

t|τ i

Fig. 2. The architecture of Fact-based Agent Modeling (FAM). During the
execution phase, the encoder module of FBI utilizes the local information of
the agent to extract representations of other agents’ policies, which are then
used for the agent’s decision-making process. On the other hand, during the
training phase, the decoder module reconstructs the facts and simultaneously
trains both the encoder and decoder. The agent makes decisions based on its
own action-observation trajectories and the representations of other agents’
policies.

variable zi
t at time step t contains the policy representation of
other agents except agent i itself. To learn the latent informa-
tion, FAM employs FBI which is a variational encoder-decoder
architecture[23] as shown in Fig.2. Agent i uses an encoder
q consists of a recurrent neural network and a fully con-
nected neural network to infer representations of other agents’
policies by local information including the observation-action-
reward triplet. It outputs µi and log(σi) which is the param-
eters of variational distribution. And the policy representation
of other agents are sampled from the variational distribution.
Specifically, the goal of the encoder is to approximate the
true posterior p(zi) using a variational distribution obtained
solely from local information. FBI constructs a decoder p to
learn the representation of other agents by reconstructing facts
conditioned on policy representations zi ∼ N (µi, σi) and the
agent’s observation-action. The encoder is parameterized by
ψi, and the state prediction and reward prediction function
in the decoder are parameterized by ϕi and φi, respectively.
FBI jointly optimizes ψi, ϕi, and φi to maximize the evidence
lower bound(ELBO) of the sampled trajectory τ i
1:t, as follows,

(8)

ELBO(ψi, ϕi, φi|τ i

−βDKL(q(µi

(cid:3)

(cid:2)Jrecon
1:t) = E
zi
t∼qψi)
1:t; ψi)||p(zi))
t|τ i
t, σi
t, zi
t, ai
t+1|oi

t, oi

1, ri

2, oi

1, ai

i. τ i

t+1, ˆri

2, ..., ri

t; ϕi, φi) is recon-
where Jrecon = log p(ˆoi
struction loss. The ELBO is related to the state tran-
1:t =
sition and reward functions of each agent
(oi
t) represents the local trajectory infor-
mation of agent i up to time step t. p(zi) is the prior
distribution of the latent variable zi, we assume the latent vari-
able follows a standard Gaussian distribution zi ∼ N (0, I).
DKL is the Kullback-Leibler(KL) divergence which measures
the distance between the approximate posterior distribution q
and the true posterior distribution p. The hyperparameter β
is used for controling the importance of the regularization

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

5

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure for FAM Algorithm
Initialize: θi, ωi, Φi = {ψi, ϕi, φi}, β, α1, α2, B, E;
Output: θ∗

i , ϕ∗

i , φ∗

i };

i , Φ∗

i = {ψ∗
i , ω∗
1: for each episode j do
2:
3:
4:
5:

Initial observation o0 ← {oi
for each timestep t do

0}n
1

qψi}n

i=1;

Get observations ot = {oi
Compute opponent embeddings zt = {zi

i=1;

t}n

t ∼

6:
7:

8:
9:

10:
11:
12:
13:
14:

15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:

Sample action ui
t, zi
Perform joint actions ut = (u1

t ∼ πi(·|oi

t; θi);
t , ..., un

t ) and reveive

joint reward rt+1 and next observations
t+1}n

ot+1 = {oi
Add transition {ot, zt, ut, rt+1, ot+1} → Bj,t

i=1;

end for
if |B| = batch size then

for each epoch e < E do
for each agent i do

ωi ← ωi − α1∇ωiLcritic (Eq.10)
θi ← θi − α1∇θiLactor (Eq.11)
Φi ← Φi − α2∇ΦiLf bi (Eq. 9)
B ← ∅;

end for

end for
Soft update parameters θ

′

′

i, ω

i, Φ

′

i with θi, ωi, Φi

end if

21:
22: end for

term KL divergence[13]. Minimizing the loss is equivalent
to maximizing the ELBO, and thus the loss function of the
FBI as follows:

Lf bi(ψi, ϕi, φi) = E
d
(cid:88)

−β

1
2

j=1

(cid:2)Jrecon_obs + Jrecon_rew

(cid:3)

zi
t∼qψi

(1 + log(σ2

t,i,j) − µ2

t,i,j − σ2

t,i,j)

(9)

t, ai

t+1|oi

t, zi
t, ai
t+1|oi
t; φi) − ri

t; ϕi) − oi
t+1)2 and
where Jrecon_obs = (pobs(ˆoi
t+1)2 are the observa-
Jrecon_rew = (pr(ˆri
t, zi
tion prediction and reward prediction loss functions, respec-
tively. d represents the dimensionality of the latent variable
zi. The intuitive interpretation of this loss function is that
the decoder p is optimized to reconstruct the facts that occur
after taking an action, specifically received in next time step’s
observation and reward.

B. Training Algorithm of FAM

In this section, we describe the training process of FAM.
The sampled trajectory of the agent, along with the latent
variable zi, is used to optimize the RL policy. We consider
an augmented policy space T augi = Oi × U i × Z i for agent
i, where Oi and U i are the original observation and action
spaces of the Dec-POMDP, and Z i represents the belief space
of agent i on other agents. Specifically, the belief refers to the
policy representations of other agnets. Compared to the policy
space without considering other agents’ policy representations

T augi = Oi × U i, the augmented policy space T i allows
for different responses to different zi ∈ Z i. This enables
adaptive behavior based on the policy representations of other
agents. We assume that all agents learn simultaneously in
the same environment. Due to the delayed nature of other
agents’ policy changes, which affect the agent’s belief about
their policy representations, we train the FAM using on-policy
algorithm. In our experiments, we use the PPO algorithm to
optimize the agent’s policy. The inputs to the Actor and Critic
are the local action-observation trajectories and the inferenced
policy representation zi. Additionally, the RL loss does not
backpropagate into FBI. To encourage exploration, we also
use policy entropy[24]. Given a batch of sampled trajectories
B, the loss for the Critic network is defined as follows:

Lcritic(ωi) = EB

(cid:2)(ri

t+1 + γV (oi

t+1, zi
t, zi

t+1; ω−
i )
t; ωi))(cid:3)

−V (oi

(10)

where V is the target network, z indicates that the loss of
the Critic network does not backpropagate through z, and
ω− represents the parameters of the Critic target network,
which are also not updated through gradient backpropagation.
Additionally, the loss for the Actor network is defined as
follows:

Lactor(θi) = E

t+1)∼B
min(ratiot(θi), clip(ratiot(θi), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ))Ai
t

t+1,oi

t,ai

t,zi

t,ri

(oi

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(11)

where ratiot = π(at|ot,zt;θi)
old) is the action probability ratio
π(at|ot,zt;θi
of the old and new policies, and clip modifies the surrogate
objective by restricting the probability ratio.

Now we can define a training objective to learn the ap-
proximate posterior distribution q as well as reward prediction
function pr and observation prediction function pobs, as fol-
lows:

Lf am(θ, ω, ψ, ϕ, φ)= Lactor + Lcritic + Lf bi

(12)

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

In this section, we aim to investigate the following aspects
of FAM: 1). whether FBI improve learning efficiency, promote
cooperative among multi agents, and learn adaptive collabo-
ration strategies? 2). how FAM enables collaboration through
adaptive strategies, 3). does FBI encode the policies of other
agents, and beyong that, what other important information is
encoded. To answer these three questions, we conduct exper-
ments in two multi-agent particle environments: Cooperative
Navigation (CN) and Predator-Prey (PP), as introduced by
Lowe et al.[17]. The implementation is based on the epymarl
framework proposed by Papoudakis et al.[25].

A. Experimental Setup

1) Environments: We introduce the two environments used

for our proposed FAM and baselines.

Cooperative Navigation: In this task, N agents need to
cooperatively occupy L landmarks in an environment with
partial observability. The team reward function rdistance =

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

6

− (cid:80)N
i=1 minj dis(Landmarki, Agentj) is based on the neg-
ative sum of distances between the landmarks and their closest
agents. Additionally, we discourage collisions between agents,
and a collision penalty rcollision = −1 is applied. Each agent
needs to observe the movements of other agents to infer their
behavior or goals, select a suitable landmark to occupy while
avoiding conflicts and collisions with other agents. We conduct
experiments with N = 5 agents and L = 5 landmarks, where
each agent can only observe the relative positions of the two
closest agents and three closest landmarks. The agents have 5
available actions, and the maximum episode length is set to
25.

Predator-Prey (PP): In this task, N predators try to capture
M preys in an environment with partial observability. The
preys follow predefined policies to move away from the closest
predators with a speed of 7, while the predators are only 5.
Since preys have a faster movement speed than predators,
individual predators cannot capture preys on their own. The
team reward for predators is the negative sum of distances
between the preys and their closest predators. A collision
penalty rcollision = −1 is also applied to the predators. In PP
task, each predator can observe the relative positions of the two
closest predators and three closest preys. The predators have 5
available actions. Unlike in Cooperative Navigation, the preys
exhibit highly dynamic movement. Therefore, predators need
to infer the behavior of other predators and target preys to
cooperate with other predators and capture the desired preys.
We conduct experiments with N = 7 predators and M = 3
preys.

In IA2C, each agent treats other agents as a part of the
environment and utilizes the A2C algorithm to learn and
optimize its Actor network with 3 for approximating the policy
πθi and Critic network with 4 for approximating the value
function Vωi in distributed multi-agent systems[24].

t, ui

t−1, ri

2) Implementation Detials: Next, we will introduce the im-
plementation details of the proposed FBI and FAM. The FAM
consists of actor network, critic network and FBI network
parameterized by θi, ωi and Φi = {ψi, ϕi, φi}, respectively.
The FBI includes an RNN-based encoder and two MLP-based
decoders. During execution, RNN-based encoder takes the
local observation-action-reward triplet (oi
t) as input
through a 1-layer fully connected neural network(FC) followed
by a ReLU activation function to extract features, which are
then fed into a GRU recurrent network to capture temporal
dependencies. Finally, a 1-layer FC outputs the variational
distribution parameters µi
t and log σi
t that approximate the true
posterior distribution. The sampled with dimension d = 5 is
the policy representation of other agents for agent decision-
making. During training, MLP-based decoder takes the local
observation-action-policy representation (oi
t) as input
through 3-layer FC and followed by ReLU activation functions
to output the predictions of rewards and observations obtained
after executing action. It is important to note that the last fully
connected layer does not require a ReLU activation function.
The RNN-based encoder and MLP-based decoder are trained
by computing the prediction loss and regularization term.

t, ui

t, zi

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION COMPARISON OF FAM AGAINST BASELINES
IN CN.

Methods

Avg. Ret.

Avg. Rew.

Avg. Occ.

Avg. Dist.

IPPO
IA2C
MAA2C
MAPPO
FAM
LIAM
SMA2C

−26.2 ± 8.2
−0.52 ± 0.3
−34.6 ± 10.1 −1.08 ± 0.5
−1.09 ± 0.4
−34.8 ± 9.4
−0.52 ± 0.3
−26.1 ± 7.8
−0.50 ± 0.3
−25.5 ± 8.8
−1.06 ± 0.4
−35.2 ± 9.6
−1.12 ± 0.5
−35.3 ± 9.6

4.56 ± 0.4
3.48 ± 1.0
3.06 ± 1.1
4.57 ± 0.5
4.45 ± 0.5
3.31 ± 1.0
3.26 ± 1.1

0.45 ± 0.2
1.02 ± 0.4
1.06 ± 0.4
0.48 ± 0.3
0.45 ± 0.3
1.05 ± 0.4
1.05 ± 0.4

B. Main Results

We compare FAM with several baselines to verify the
effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed method. Figure
3a) and Figure 3b) show the average episode return curves
and average landmarks occupied curve of FAM compared with
other baseline algorithms in CN during training. Figure 3c)
shows the average episode return curves of various methods
trained in PP with training duration of 1e7 steps. And Table
I presents the performance metrics of various algorithms
evaluating 100 episodes in CN, including average episode
return(Avg. Ret.), average reward at the final timestep(Avg.
Rew.), average occupied landmarks(Avg. Occ.), and the sum
of the average distances of all landmarks from the nearest
agent(Avg. Dist.).

From Fig. 3 a). and 3 b)., we can see that the proposed FAM
achieves higher learning efficiency than all other baselines
from 1e6 training steps, as well as faster convergence, and
slightly outperforms IPPO and MAPPO from 4e6 training
steps. The main reason is that after all agents learn a certain
strategy, considering the strategies of other agents will help
the agents learn adaptive cooperation strategies. And they
struggle with partial observability of the environment after 4e6
steps. Meanwhile, the shaded areas of IPPO and MAPPO are
larger compared with FAM, which indicates that the cooper-
ative strategy without considering other agents is less robust.
Among the four evaluation performances as shown in Table I,
FAM has reached the best compared with all other baselines.
The average episode return curves of IA2C, MAA2C, LIAM,
and SMA2C overlap and show slow learning. And in Figure
3b), IA2C occupies more landmarks. Similar results are shown
in Table I which indicates that IA2C performs slightly better
than SMA2C, LIAM, and MAA2C. The possible reason is
that the low sample efficiency of the A2C methods and agents
only need to consider other agents at certain critical moments
in CN, which makes the performance of independent similar to
CTDE methods. Additionally, LIAM and SMA2C do not show
superiority. This could be due to the low sample efficiency
of the A2C methods and the high randomness in directly
modeling the actions of other agents in a non-stationary
environment.

It can be seen from Figure 3c) that IA2C performs the
worst and the proposed FAM outperforms all other baseline
by considering the strategies of other agents. The possible
reason is that preys are highly dynamic and move faster
than predators, which requires closer cooperation between

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

7

Fig. 3. The training results of the proposed FAM and the baseline method in CN and PP environments. a)The episode return curves during training in CN.
b)The occupied landmarks curves during training in CN. c)The episode return curves in PP. The solid line is the mean of the training results of 5 random
seeds, and the shaded area is the 25%-75% quartile.

the agent. To investigate the impact of the following factors
in FBI network: 1) decoder input and 2) reconstruction tar-
gets, we conducted ablation experiments in the Predator-Prey
environment.

i). FAM_wo_in_oa, where the decoder

The ablation experiments included the following varia-
tions:
input only
consisted of the representation of other agents’ policies. ii).
FAM_wo_rec_obs, where the decoder only reconstructed re-
wards. iii). FAM_wo_rec_rew, where the decoder only re-
constructed observations. The average episode return curves
of the Predator-Prey task are plotted in Figure 4. These
ablation experiments aim to examine the contributions of
different components in FBI. By comparing the performance
of these variations with the FAM, we can gain insights into
the importance of decoder input and the reconstruction of
observations and rewards.

The decoder in FBI network takes the agent’s local observa-
tions, actions and inferred representation as input. We denote
the agent’s local observations and actions as "oa". To compare
the impact of the decoder input, we denote the decoder input
as FAM_wo_in_oa only for other agent policy representations
z and keep the reconstruction fact unchanged. As shown
in Figure 4, FAM is generally better than FAM_wo_in_oa.
Although FAM and FAM_wo_in_oa have similar performance
in the early stage, both can effectively improve the efficiency
of policy learning. But when struggling partial observability,
FAM has an advantage. The possible reason is that the decoder
to understand the
design of FBI is better for the agent
dynamics of the environment.

To compare the impact of the decoder reconstruction targets,
we compare the training results of FAM_wo_rec_obs and
FAM_wo_rec_rew on PP task, as shown in Figure 4. It
can be seen that the performance of FAM_wo_rec_rew is
better, but it is weaker than FAM_wo_rec_obs in the early
stage. The possible reason is that
the team reward helps
to extract other agents’ policy representations, but this is a
spurious reward signal, which may also hinder the learning of
other agents’ policies. The observation can directly represent
the movement information of the surrounding agents, which
provides rich verification information for each individual.
Moreover, FAM has the advantages of FAM_wo_rec_rew and

Fig. 4. Comparing the ablation results of FAM and its belief inference network
in the Predator-Prey environment.

predators and adaptation to other predators’ strategy to capture
preys cooperatively. However, independent IA2C is difficult
to achieve. Moreover, MAA2C employs a centralized critic
that utilizes global information to guide the policy learning
of agents and achieves better performance than IA2C. But the
performance of LIAM and SMA2C falls behind the centralized
critic. The possible reason is that the centralized critic provides
more effective information for guiding policy learning under
partially observability. IPPO and MAPPO exhibit similar av-
erage episode return curves which can be attributed to the
effectiveness of the PPO algorithm. This finding aligns with
previous studies[26] and [25].

In general,

in the experimental settings of CN andPP,
we found it interesting that the agent modeling method can
quickly and effectively improve the learning efficiency and
learn adaptive collaboration strategies to obtain higher rewards
after other agents learn a certain strategy. The good news is
that it didn’t hinder the agent’s strategy learning before this.

C. Ablation Results

The fact-based belief inference (FBI) network in FAM
utilizes a variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture, whose
input and reconstruction target are the local information of

a)b)c)JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

8

Fig. 5. The navigation trajectories and immediate reward curves of three evaluation scenarios of FAM, IPPO and MAPPO under Cooperative Navigation task.

FAM_wo_rec_obs by reconstructing observations and rewards,
and has the best performance both in the early stage of training
and in the stage of struggling partial observability.

Overall, the decoder reconstructs observations and rewards
by inputting its own observations, actions, and policy repre-
sentations to better help the agent understand the dynamics of
the environment.

D. Strategy Analysis

In order to understand the representation of other agents
learned by FAM, we conducted evaluations and compared and
analyzed the cooperative strategies of FAM agents with IPPO
and MAPPO agents in the Cooperative Navigation. Figure
5 shows the evaluated navigation trajectories and immediate
reward curves of the three methods of FAM, IPPO and
MAPPO in CN.

It can be seen that all FAM agents can move near the
landmark or successfully occupy the landmark, and the im-
mediate rewards are the best. However, the IPPO agent and
the MAPPO agent can not due to the goal conflict between the
agents. We summarize the cooperative skills learned by FAM
agents,
including i). Communicate without communication
(CWC), ii). Avoiding goal conflict and competition (AGCC),
iii). Giving up the small to keep the big (GSKB).

Communicate without communication: Once the strategy
of other agents is found to change, it will change its own
strategy in time to meet the needs of the task. As shown in
Figure 5a), both agent 1 and agent 2 want to occupy landmark
1, and there is a goal conflict. However, agent 2 has an
advantage in distance when occupying landmark 1, so agent 1
has to change the landmark to 2. At this time, Agent 4 wants
to occupy landmark 4, but it infers that the strategy of Agent
1 is occupy landmark 2 which is farther away, which makes

it take longer to complete the task. There, agent 4 changes
the navigation landmark to 2 and agent 1 changes its own
navigation landmark to 4 for shorest complete time. However,
Agent 1 and Agent 4 of IPPO and MAPPO have landmark
conflict and competition, as shown in Figure 5 b) and c).

the goals of other agents conflict with itself,

Avoiding goal conflict and competition: When it is found
it will
that
change its own goals according to the actual situation to
avoid competition. As shown in Figure 5d), there is a goal
conflict between agent 1 and agent 3 bacause they want to
occupy landmark. However, agent 1 occupys landmark 4 is
more advantageous, because agent 3 is closer to unoccupied
landmark 2. Therefore, agent 3 changes the landmark to avoid
goal conflict can promote overall cooperation and complete
the task faster. In contrast, IPPO agent and MAPPO agent
failed to achieve this. As shown in Figure 5e), there is a
goal conflict and goal competition between Agent 1 and
Agent 5. Agent 5 cannot observe landmark 2 due to partial
observability. Therefore, agent 5 cannot effectively occupy
landmark. A possible effective method is that agent 2 changes
its own landmark to 2. This collaborative strategy is reflected
by MAPPO, as shown in Figure 5f). But it takes longer to
complete the task.

Give up the small to keep the big: When there is a goal
conflict or the goal can be occupied by a more advantageous
agent, the agent will change its own goal to shorten the time
to complete the task. This skill is demonstrated in Figure 5g),
where Agent 2, although closer to landmark 1 and 4, chooses
the farther landmark 5 to facilitate faster landmark occupation
by Agent 1 and Agent 5. In contrast, IPPO and MAPPO agents
fail to achieve the goal of conflict-free. In Figure 5h) and 5i),
there is a landmark conflict and competition between agents.

FAMFAMFAMIPPOIPPOIPPOMAPPOMAPPOMAPPOJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

9

Fig. 6. a) and d) are trajectory plots of the agents in the CN. b) and c) are t-SNE projections of the embedding vectors learned by agent 1 and agent 2 in
trajectory a). And e) and f) are t-SNE projections of the embedding vectors learned by agent 1 and agent 2 in trajectory b), respectively. We use a maximum
time step of 25 to visualize the embedding vector of each time step, and use circles with different colors for each cluster.

E. Encoder Evaluation

After evaluating the advantages of the FBI module in FAM
for adaptive strategy learning, we analyzed the embedding
vectors learned by the RNN-based encoder in FBI to gain
deeper insights into the proposed method. We addressed the
question of whether FAM encode the strategies about other
agents. We visualized the embedding vectors of the RNN-
encoder and analyzed the learned embeddings. To facilitate
the understanding of the encoded embeddings of other agents,
we conducted experiments in CN with N = 2 agents, L = 2
landmarks. Figure 6 visualizes the evaluation results.

We observed that points corresponding to adjacent time
steps tend to form clusters, and each cluster is correlated with
the agent’s motion state. From Figure 6a), we can see that
Agent 2 moves towards the bottom right direction, approaching
the landmark and hovering around it. These two processes
form two distinct clusters in Figure 6b). And Agent 1’s
motion consists of four steps, with the first three steps marked
by arrows and the final step involving hovering around the
landmark. These four steps correspond to the four distinct
clusters formed in Figure 6c). Based on these observations, we
hypothesize that different clusters represent different aspects
of the modeled agent’s motion, including the magnitude and
direction of motion.

Additionally, we speculate that

the encoder embedding

vectors also include the positional information of the modeled
agents. From the trajectory in Fig .6d), it can be seen that the
agent 2 moves upward first, then moves upward to the right and
gradually approaches landmark and hovers around it. These
three processes also form three different clusters in Fig .6e).
Compared to the red cluster, the blue cluster is closer to the
green cluster. We can see that there are only three clustering
results in Fig.6f), and its motion process has four steps. The
possible reason is that the last movement close to the landmark
is close to the position hovering near the landmark, and they
are classified into the same cluster. In addition, in the same
cluster, the distance between points at adjacent moments is
small, while the distance between points at multiple moments
is large.

VI. CONCLUSION

We have proposed a Fact-based Agent Modeling (FAM) for
multi-agent learning that build FBI to reconstruct facts for
achieving agent modeling without accessing local information
of other agents. By considering the policy of other agents
during decision-making, FAM outperforms baseline methods
and achieving higher rewards in complex mixed scenarios.
Extensive experimental is conducted to verify the effectiveness
and feasibility of the proposed FAM and analyse the encoder
information of FBI.

a)b)c)d)e)f)JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

10

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berner, G. Brockman, B. Chan, V. Cheung, P. D˛ebiak, C. Dennison,
D. Farhi, Q. Fischer, S. Hashme, C. Hesse et al., “Dota 2 with large
scale deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680,
2019.

[2] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik,
J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell, T. Ewalds, P. Georgiev et al., “Grand-
master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782, pp. 350–354, 2019.

[3] X. Yu, J. Jiang, W. Zhang, H. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Model-based opponent
modeling,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 28 208–28 221, 2022.

[4] S. V. Albrecht and P. Stone, “Autonomous agents modelling other agents:
A comprehensive survey and open problems,” Artificial Intelligence, vol.
258, pp. 66–95, 2018.

[5] H. He, J. Boyd-Graber, K. Kwok, and H. Daumé III, “Opponent
modeling in deep reinforcement learning,” in International conference
on machine learning. PMLR, 2016, pp. 1804–1813.

[6] Z.-W. Hong, S.-Y. Su, T.-Y. Shann, Y.-H. Chang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A
deep policy inference q-network for multi-agent systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
MultiAgent Systems, 2018, pp. 1388–1396.

[7] B. Chen, “Local information based attentional opponent modelling in

multi-agent reinforcement learning,” 2022.

[8] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, and S. Albrecht, “Agent modelling under
learning,” Advances in
partial observability for deep reinforcement
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 19 210–19 222,
2021.

[9] G. Papoudakis

and S. Albrecht,

for
opponent modeling in multi-agent systems,” Feb. 2020, aAAI 2020
Workshop on Reinforcement Learning in Games, AAAI20-RLG ;
Conference date: 08-02-2020 Through 08-02-2020. [Online]. Available:
http://aaai-rlg.mlanctot.info/index.html

autoencoders

“Variational

[10] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A concise introduction to decentralized

POMDPs. Springer, 2016.

[11] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy gradi-
ent methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 12, 1999.
[12] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning,” Reinforcement learning, pp. 5–
32, 1992.

[13] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. Botvinick,
S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner, “beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts
with a constrained variational framework,” in International conference
on learning representations, 2017.

[14] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 7234–7284, 2020.

[15] T. Rashid, G. Farquhar, B. Peng, and S. Whiteson, “Weighted qmix:
Expanding monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent
information processing
reinforcement
systems, vol. 33, pp. 10 199–10 210, 2020.

learning,” Advances in neural

[16] M. Gallici, M. Martin, and I. Masmitja, “Transfqmix: Transformers for
leveraging the graph structure of multi-agent reinforcement learning
problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05334, 2023.

[17] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” in
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 6382–6393.

[18] S. Iqbal and F. Sha, “Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement
the 36th International Conference
learning,” in Proceedings of
on Machine Learning,
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, Eds., vol. 97.
PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 2961–2970.
[Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/iqbal19a.html

[19] P. Hernandez-Leal, B. Kartal, and M. E. Taylor, “Agent modeling
as auxiliary task for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence and interactive digital
entertainment, vol. 15, no. 1, 2019, pp. 31–37.

[20] J. Foerster, R. Y. Chen, M. Al-Shedivat, S. Whiteson, P. Abbeel, and
I. Mordatch, “Learning with opponent-learning awareness,” in Proceed-
ings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
MultiAgent Systems, 2018, pp. 122–130.

[21] M. Al-Shedivat, T. Bansal, Y. Burda, I. Sutskever, I. Mordatch, and
P. Abbeel, “Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary
and competitive environments,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2018.

[22] D. K. Kim, M. Liu, M. D. Riemer, C. Sun, M. Abdulhai, G. Habibi,
S. Lopez-Cot, G. Tesauro, and J. How, “A policy gradient algorithm for
learning to learn in multiagent reinforcement learning,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 5541–5550.
[23] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

[24] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
forcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2016, pp. 1928–1937.

[25] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, L. Schäfer, and S. V. Albrecht, “Bench-
marking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooper-
ative tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07869, 2020.

[26] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and
Y. WU, “The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent
Information Processing Systems,
games,” in Advances in Neural
S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh,
Eds., vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 24 611–24 624.
[Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2022/file/9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-Paper-Datasets_and_
Benchmarks.pdf

Baofu Fang received Ph.D. degree in Computer
Application Technology from Harbin Institute of
Technology, China in 2013. He joined Department of
Computer Science and Technology, School of Com-
puter Science and Information Engineering, Hefei
University of Technology in 2000, and An Asso-
ciate Professor in 2010, and Master’s Supervisor in
2011. His current research interests include multi
robot/agent system, emotion/self-interest robot and
machine learning. He is the Technology Chair of
Anhui Robot Competition, Member of Standing
Committee of China Association of Artificial Intelligence (CAAI) Young
Committee, Member of Standing Committee of China Association of Artificial
Intelligence (CAAI) Robot and Culture Committee.

Caiming Zheng received the B.Eng degree in com-
puter science and technology from Ningbo Univer-
sity of Technology, China in 2021. He is currently
pursuing a M.S. degree in computer science and
technology at the School of Computer Science and
Information Engineering, Hefei University of Tech-
nology, China. His research interests include multi-
agnet systems, reinforcement
learning and multi-
agent reinforcement learning.

Hao Wang received the B.Eng degree from Shang-
hai Jiao Tong University in 1984, and received M.S.
degree and Ph.D. degree from Hefei University of
Technology in 1989 and 1997, respectively. He is
currently a Professor and Doctoral Supervisor with
the School of Computer Science and Information
Engineering, Hefei University of Technology. His
research interests include intelligent computing the-
ory and software, distributed intelligent systems,
complex system theory and modeling, etc.

