Contrastive Learning-Based Agent Modeling for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Wenhao Ma1 , Yu-Cheng Chang1 , Jie Yang1 , Yu-Kai Wang1 , Chin-Teng Lin1
1GrapheneX-UTS Human-centric Artificial Intelligence Centre (HAI),
University of Technology Sydney,
Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia

4
2
0
2

n
a
J

8
1

]

A
M

.
s
c
[

2
v
2
3
1
0
0
.
1
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Multi-agent systems often require agents to collab-
orate with or compete against other agents with di-
verse goals, behaviors, or strategies. Agent mod-
eling is essential when designing adaptive policies
for intelligent machine agents in multi-agent sys-
tems, as this is the means by which the controlled
agent (ego agent) understands other agents’ (mod-
eled agents) behavior and extracts their meaning-
ful policy representations. These representations
can be used to enhance the ego agent’s adaptive
policy which is trained by reinforcement learning.
However, existing agent modeling approaches typ-
ically assume the availability of local observations
from modeled agents during training or a long ob-
servation trajectory for policy adaption. To remove
these constrictive assumptions and improve agent
modeling performance, we devised a Contrastive
Learning-based Agent Modeling (CLAM) method
that relies only on the local observations from the
ego agent during training and execution. With these
observations, CLAM is capable of generating con-
sistent high-quality policy representations in real
time right from the beginning of each episode.
We evaluated the efficacy of our approach in both
cooperative and competitive multi-agent environ-
ments. The experiment results demonstrate that our
approach improves reinforcement learning perfor-
mance by at least 28% on cooperative and compet-
itive tasks, which exceeds the state-of-the-art.

1 Introduction
The rapid evolution of artificial intelligence has led to the
widespread deployment of machine agents in real-world set-
tings, where they collaborate with other machines and hu-
mans as multi-agent systems to achieve diverse tasks [O’Neill
et al., 2022]. In multi-agent systems, intelligent agents are
expected to work tacitly with agents having diverse goals,
behaviors, or strategies. Maintaining effective and flexi-
ble responses when facing different types of agents in a
multi-agent environment becomes a crucial question. This
challenge leads the agent modeling as a key research topic
within the field of multi-agent systems [Shoham et al., 2007;

Albrecht and Stone, 2018]. Specifically, it enables the con-
trolled agent (ego agent) to acquire a more profound compre-
hension and prediction of the policies of other agents (mod-
eled agents) present in the system. This capacity can be uti-
lized to augment the decision-making process and empower
the ego agent to adapt its behavior in accordance with the
policies of the modeled agents. For this reason, agent model-
ing, as a kind of policy representation technique, has become
an indispensable and vital component of multi-agent systems.
Existing approaches [He et al., 2016; Grover et al., 2018;
Papoudakis et al., 2021] involve using observation signals
from both the ego agent and the modeled agents to gener-
ate distinctive policy representations through deep neural net-
work models. These representations, commonly referred to
as “context information”, are then combined with the ego
agent’s real-time observation signals to train adaptive policies
for cooperating or competing with other agents via reinforce-
ment learning[Sutton and Barto, 2018]. [Grover et al., 2018]
leveraged the encoder-decoder architecture to learn modeled
agents’ policies by reconstructing the observation of the ego
agent. However, it relies on long historical observation trajec-
tories from the ego agent to generate informative policy rep-
resentation. LIAM [Papoudakis et al., 2021], following the
same architecture, feeds the ego agent’s local observations
into the encoder during the training phase and reconstructs
the local observation of the modeled agent. This process
builds the predictive capability of the ego agent regarding the
policies of modeled agents, which is why the LIAM model
solely relies on the ego agent’s local observation during exe-
cution. However, the assumption that observations from the
perspective of modeled agents are available during the train-
ing phase may not always hold in many real-world scenar-
ios. Especially in human-autonomy collaboration, it is diffi-
cult for ego agents to obtain observational information from
a human agent’s perspective for agent modeling tasks.

To address these challenges, we propose a self-supervised
representation learning method to achieve agent modeling.
Employing both attention mechanism [Vaswani et al., 2017]
and contrastive learning [Chen et al., 2020], the method en-
codes the ego agent’s local observation trajectories using an
attention-based policy encoder and identifies the most repre-
sentative trajectory features by an asymmetric sample aug-
mentation strategy in contrastive learning. Through this pro-
cess, our method produces differentiated policy representa-

 
 
 
 
 
 
This capacity can be utilized to augment the decision-making
process and empower the ego agent to adapt its behavior in
accordance with the policies of the modeled agents. [He et
al., 2016] proposed a neural network-based model to jointly
learn the adaptive policy and agent modeling model. The
Theory of mind Network (TomNet) [Rabinowitz et al., 2018],
used two networks called character net and mental net to infer
the goals of modeled agent efficiently. [Grover et al., 2018]
proposed an encoder-decoder architecture, which embeds the
input observation trajectory into feature vectors in a point-
wise manner and uses the average pooling method to generate
the representation of the trajectory. [Papoudakis et al., 2021]
also based on an encoder-decoder architecture. But they use
a recurrent encoder which can better leverage historical ob-
servation information to aid the ego agent. These mentioned
agent modeling approaches either assume the availability of
local observations from other agents (modeled agents) during
training or a long observation trajectory for policy adaption.
The key distinction between our approach and these studies
lies in the fact that we only rely on observations from the ego
agent and adapt the ego agent’s policy within a few steps.

2.2 Contrastive Learning
In recent years, contrastive learning has emerged as a promi-
nent paradigm in the realm of machine learning and repre-
sentation learning. The underlying principle of contrastive
learning revolves around learning representations by maxi-
mizing the similarity between positive pairs and minimizing
the similarity between negative pairs [Oord et al., 2018]. This
concept has gained widespread interest and has been exten-
sively explored across a spectrum of domains, encompassing
computer vision and natural language processing [Jaiswal et
al., 2020]. Seminal works like SimCLR [Chen et al., 2020]
have paved the way by introducing the concept of large-batch
training coupled with negative samples to augment the qual-
ity of learned representations. Building upon this foundation,
MoCo [He et al., 2020] incorporated a momentum moving-
averaged encoder to facilitate better feature extraction. Ad-
ditionally, approaches like SwAV [Caron et al., 2020] have
ventured into novel augmentation strategies to enhance con-
trastive learning.

3 Method
3.1 Problem Statement
In this section, we formally introduce the problem to be ad-
dressed. Overall, our goal is to create an intelligent machine
agent (ego agent) that, using its local observation to infer the
intentions, behavioral preferences, policies, and other char-
acteristics of other agents (modeled agents) within the same
environment. Through training, the ego agent will be given
the ability to interact efficiently with the modeled agents that
execute different policies picked from a diverse policy set.

This entire problem can be modeled as a Partially Observ-
able Stochastic Game (POSG) [Hansen et al., 2004] involv-
ing N agents, defined as the tuple (I, S, A, O, P, R). Here,
I = {1, ..., n} represents the set of agents. S represents the
set of states, A = A1 × A2 × . . . × AN is the joint action
space and O = O1 × O2 × . . . × ON is joint observation

Figure 1: Diagram of our proposed CLAM model and adaptive pol-
icy training architecture. The left part is for CLAM training. The
right part is for adaptive policy training.

tion embeddings of modeled agents based on the interaction
between the ego agent and modeled agents, which creates
a more straightforward and practical solution for real-world
scenarios. The key contributions of our method are as fol-
lows:

• We propose a Contrastive Learning-based Agent Mod-
eling (CLAM) model that consists of a Transformer en-
coder module and an attention pooling module. The em-
ployment of the attention mechanism in two modules
enables CLAM to dynamically allocate weights to dif-
ferent parts of the observation sequence data based on
their importance. This process significantly enhances
the model’s capability to capture the most representa-
tive feature elements during the feature representation
and aggregation stages.

• The model is trained using self-supervised contrastive
learning with accompanying asymmetric sample aug-
mentation strategy that creates positive sample pairs.
The results of comparative experiments demonstrate that
our method produces better policy representations than
those produced through symmetric sample augmenta-
tion techniques. Moreover, this novel method enables
the model to generate policy representations of modeled
agents in real time and only requires local observations
of ego agents.

• The unified training architecture concurrently trains
the agent modeling model and reinforcement learning
model resulting in a more concise, efficient, and easily
deployable framework, as shown in Fig. 1.

2 Related Work
2.1 Agent Modeling
Agent modeling (or opponent modeling) plays a crucial role
in the design of adaptive policies for intelligent machine
agents within multi-agent systems, as it enables the ego agent
to acquire a deeper comprehension and prediction of the poli-
cies of other agents (modeled agents) present in the system.

Online CLAM ModelContrastiveLearningEnvironmentReplay BufferReinforcement Learning 𝑶𝒃𝒔𝒆𝒓𝒗𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒐𝒕𝑨𝒄𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒂𝒕Episodic TrajectoryCurrent EpisodeTrajectory𝝉𝒕: {𝑶𝟏,𝑶𝟐,…,𝑶𝒕}Projection LayerTarget CLAM ModelTrajectory AugmentationMomentum Update𝑷𝒐𝒍𝒊𝒄𝒚 𝒆𝒎𝒃𝒆𝒅𝒅𝒊𝒏𝒈 𝒄𝒕Figure 2: Diagram of CLAM model training process.

space. P represents the state transition and observation prob-
abilities, where P (st+1, ot+1|st, at) denotes the probability
of taking joint action at at state st to the next state st+1 and
joint observation ot+1 and R represents the reward function,
where R : S × A → ℜ.

To ensure clarity and precision, we use ”m” and ”e” to la-
bel the modeled agent and the ego agent, e.g., om and oe rep-
resent the local observations of the modeled agent and the
ego agent, respectively. It is assumed that a set of predefined
fixed policies exists Π = {πm
i |i = 1, 2, . . . , n}, which can
either be hand-coded or created via reinforcement learning.
The policies within this policy set are randomly selected and
made available for execution by the modeled agent. A fixed
policy πm
t ) represents a function that maps the mod-
eled agent’s current observation om
to a distribution over its
t
action am
t . Our objective is to train the ego agent’s adaptive
policy πα, which is parameterized by α, to achieve the max-
imum expected return through interactions with the policies
in the fixed policy set Π:

i (am

t |om

Eπm

i ∼u(Π)[Eπα,πm

i

T −1
(cid:88)
[

t=0

γtrt(oe

t , ae

t )]]

(1)

where the inner expectation accounts for the discounted cu-
mulative reward acquired by the ego agent throughout one
episode length T and the outer expectation accounts for the
ego agent’s average episodic return over various policies πm
i
of the modeled agent. The policy πm
is drawn from a uniform
i
distribution u(Π). rt(·) is the ego agent’s reward function and
γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor to balance the trade-off be-
tween immediate return and long-term return.

3.2 Contrastive Learning-based Agent Modeling

To address our research problem, a contrastive learning-based
agent modeling model is proposed to generate real-time pol-
icy representation of modeled agents. As its input, this model
takes an observation trajectory of the ego agent from the be-
ginning of an episode 0 up to the current time t, i.e., τt =
[oe
t ]. It then generates and outputs a policy repre-
sentation vector ct. This vector is intended to encapsulate the
policy-specific information of the modeled agent, including
its objectives, its behavioral characteristics, and policy infor-
mation. This real-time policy representation vector ct will be

2, ..., oe

1, oe

used in conjunction with the real-time observations oe
ego agent to condition the adaptive policies as πα(at|oe

t of the
t , ct).
In this work, the agent modeling model CLAM is com-
posed of two components: (1) a Transformer encoder to trans-
form the original observation trajectory τt into corresponding
feature representation sequence Rt := {ri}i=0:t, where ri is
the representation vector at time-step i; (2) an attention pool-
ing module to aggregation the temporal feature sequence Rt
into a policy representation vector ct. Next, how the two com-
ponents are constructed will be described in detail.

Transformer Encoder: The observation trajectory of the
ego agent can be considered a form of sequential data, which
naturally prompted us to consider using a Transformer en-
coder fθ(·), parameterized by θ, to capture patterns and rela-
tionships within the ego agent’s observation trajectories. We
leverage the standard Transformer encoder [Vaswani et al.,
2017] which consists of multiple multi-head self-attention
blocks. Firstly, we encode the ego agent’s observation trajec-
tory with position embeddings to retain temporal information.
Given the ego agent’s observation trajectory τ ∈ Rt×d, where
d and t represent observation vector dimension and trajectory
length respectively, we encode the observation trajectory τ
with position embeddings method pos(·) to retain temporal
information, i.e.,

τ ′ = τ + pos(τ ).
(2)
Then, the multi-head self-attention method is used to ex-
tract policy features from different perspectives simultane-
ously, which has been found to significantly enhance the
model’s representation capacity [Devlin et al., 2018; Rad-
ford et al., 2018; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020]. Given n attention
heads, τ ′ is projected into the query Qn, key Kn and value
Vn as:

{Qn, Kn, Vn} = {τ ′WQ
n ∈ Rd×dk , WK

n , τ ′WV
n },
(3)
n ∈ Rd×dv , dk =
where WQ
dv = d/n are learnable weight matrices. The computation of
multi-head attention can be expressed as follows:

n , τ ′WK
n ∈ Rd×dk , WV

For the nth head hn:

hn = Softmax

(cid:19)

(cid:18) QnKT
n√
dk

Vn

(4)

Finally, the outputs of each head are concatenated and lin-
early transformed to obtain the observation trajectory’s cor-
responding feature representation sequence Rt as:

Rt = concat(h1, h2, . . . , hn)WO

(5)

   𝑀𝐴𝑆𝐾  𝑜(cid:2871)(cid:4593)𝑀𝐴𝑆𝐾  𝑜(cid:2869)(cid:4593)…  𝑜(cid:2870)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑜(cid:2871)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑜(cid:3041)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑜(cid:2869)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)…  𝑟(cid:2870)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:2871)(cid:4593)   𝑟(cid:3040)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:2869)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:2870)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:2871)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:3041)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑟(cid:2869)(cid:4593)(cid:4593)PositionEmbeddingContrastiveLoss  𝑃…𝑠(cid:4593)𝑠(cid:4593)(cid:4593)PositionEmbeddingTransformerEncoderAttentionPoolingAttentionPooling…TrajectorySample𝑅(cid:4593)𝑅(cid:4593)(cid:4593)  𝑃  𝑐(cid:4593)  𝑐(cid:4593)(cid:4593)Cropped trajectory pointsPolicy tokenPosition-wise AdditionDot product of query and keysGradient update  𝑃Projection HeadTransformerEncoderProjection Headwhere WO is a trainable weight matrix used for linear trans-
formation.

Attention Pooling Module: After the Transformer en-
coder generates the feature embedding sequence Rt for each
episode step within the observation trajectory, the next step
is to aggregate the feature embedding sequence into a single
policy representation vector for the current interaction time-
step. Conventional methods usually employ average pooling
[Rabinowitz et al., 2018; Grover et al., 2018] for this feature
aggregation step. However, since each vector in the trajectory
might have a different contribution to the final policy repre-
sentation vector, we believe that using an attention mecha-
nism might better capture complex temporal relationships and
patterns within the trajectory. Thus, our model appends an at-
tention pooling module poolϕ(·) parameterized by ϕ after the
Transformer encoder. We create a special trainable policy to-
ken P ∈ R1×d as the query in the attention mechanism to ag-
gregate the feature embedding sequence Rt, attention pooling
function poolϕ(·) with policy token P is defined as:

poolϕ(Rt) = rF F (MultiHead(P, Rt, Rt))

(6)

where rF F is row-wise feedforward layers and MultiHead
means the multi-head attention mechanism. This policy token
P helps to aggregate the entire input feature vector sequence
Rt into a single policy representation vector ct. Our experi-
ments also verify that attention-based pooling helps the agent
to get higher returns compared to average pooling. A detailed
analysis can be found in the ablation study.

Contrastive Learning Training: We optimize the param-
eters of the transformer encoder θ and attention-based pool-
ing module ϕ through self-supervised contrastive learning.
The overall training process is depicted in Fig. 2. Firstly, We
select a batch of size N observation trajectories {τi}i=1:N
from the replay buffer. Then, we randomly crop two tra-
jectory windows from each sampled trajectory and form two
sample sets S = {si}i=1:N and S′ = {s′
i}i=1:N . The two
cropped samples si and s′
i extracted from the same original
trajectory τi can be considered positive sample pairs, while
trajectory samples cropped from different original trajectory
samples serve as negative sample pairs. Subsequently, we
conduct secondary sample augmentation on one sample set
S. This involves randomly masking a certain ratio of ob-
servation steps in the trajectory sample, resulting in a new
sample set S′′, while the other sample set S′ remains un-
altered. The masked observation steps are replaced with 0.
The sample set S′′ subjected to mask-based augmentation is
termed ”strong augmentation,” while the unaltered one S′ is
referred to as ”weak augmentation”. This asymmetric sam-
ple augmentation approach has been experimentally shown
to enhance the performance of contrastive learning models
[Wang et al., 2022]. We believe the underlying rationale for
our asymmetric sample augmentation approach is to compel
the model to extract more representative policy features from
sparser and less informative observation trajectories. This ap-
proach enhances the model’s ability to capture subtle patterns,
making it more adept at handling real-time policy representa-
tion tasks.

We utilize the InfoNCE loss proposed in [Oord et al., 2018]

as the loss function for contrastive learning:

LC(θ, ϕ) = −

1
N

N
(cid:88)

i=1

log

i · c′′

exp(c′
k=1 exp(c′

i /δ)
i · c′′

(cid:80)N

k/δ)

,

(7)

is a positive pair of policy representations and c′′

where N is the batch size, δ is a temperature parameter, c′
i
and c′′
k is
i
any other samples generated by the agent modeling model.
Note that a projection head is also used, which is the same as
in [Chen et al., 2020].

3.3 Reinforcement Learning Training
Reinforcement learning is employed to train adaptive poli-
cies. The real-time output policy representation vector ct
from the agent modeling mode is combined with the ego
agent’s observation state oe
t , to condition the optimal policy,
i.e., πα(at|oe
t , ct). As a result, the trained agent policy can
generate optimal action outputs specialized for the represen-
tation information ct. In this paper, we select PPO [Schul-
man et al., 2017] as the backbone algorithm for reinforcement
learning training. However, it’s important to note that other
reinforcement learning algorithms can also be equally appli-
cable. The specific objective function is defined as follows:

(cid:20)
LP P O(α) = E

min

(cid:18) πα(at|oe
t , ct)
παold(at|oe
t , ct)
(cid:18) πα(at|oe
t , ct)
παold(at|oe
t , ct)
− c · E [H(πα(at|oe

clip

t , ct))] ,

· At,

(cid:19)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ

· At

(8)
where At is the advantage function, representing the advan-
tage of taking action at with observation oe
t , H(·) is the en-
tropy function, c is the coefficient of entropy regularization
and clip(·) is a clipping function used to restrict the magni-
tude of policy updates.

4 Experiments
4.1 Environments
We selected two representative multi-agent environments to
evaluate our method: a cooperative environment, level-based
foraging [Christianos et al., 2020; Papoudakis et al., 2020]
and a competitive environment, predator-prey [Mordatch and
Abbeel, 2018]. We created a fixed policy set of ten policies
for each environment. At the beginning of each episode, a
policy is randomly selected from the policy set with equal
probability and assigned to the modeled agent.

Level-based Foraging: This is a grid environment consist-
ing of two agents and a number of apples, as shown in Fig.
3a. Each agent and apple has its level value, and the agent has
six action options: up, down, left, right, stay still, and pick the
apple. Agents can successfully pick up an apple when one or
both agents are located in one of the four grid cells adjacent
to the targeted apple and the sum of the agents’ levels is not
less than the apple’s level. When an apple is picked up, each
agent receives a reward based on their contribution to com-
pleting the task. The total reward value for each episode is
normalized to 1. An episode ends when all apples are picked

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: The two multi-agent environments for evaluation.
(a)
Level-based foraging. In this cooperative scenario, agents and ap-
ples are randomly placed in a grid world with assigned levels.
Agents can move around to collect adjacent apples, which is suc-
cessful if their combined levels meet or exceed the apple’s level.
(b) Predator prey. In this competitive scenario, predators (red dots)
work together to tag the prey (green dot) while the prey tries to evade
them. Both the prey and predators need to learn how to avoid obsta-
cles (black dots).

up or after 50 time steps.
In this environment, one of the
agents serves as the modeled agent while the other agent is
the ego agent and is trained via reinforcement learning. Since
our aim is to assess the model’s performance in a cooperative
environment, we compute the total reward obtained by both
agents as the team returns in each episode. A higher value
indicates more efficient cooperation among the agent team.

Predator-prey: This competitive multi-agent environment
consists of three predators, one prey, and two circular obsta-
cles, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. Each agent has five action
options: up, down, left, right, and stay still. The three preda-
tors are assigned fixed policy combinations, while the prey
is the ego agent under training. The reward setting in the
environment is such that when a predator collides with the
prey, the prey receives -10 and the predator receives +10. In
the event of a predator-predator collision, each predator re-
ceives -3 and the prey receives +3. This reward scheme en-
courages the prey to learn adversarial policy by evading the
predator team’s pursuit while inducing more chaos and col-
lisions among them. This environment is highly suitable for
evaluating the effectiveness and performance of agent model-
ing methods. By employing agent modeling methods to ac-
quire informative policy representations, the ego agent can
learn targeted adversarial policy based on different opponent
policies to obtain greater rewards. Each episode in this envi-
ronment lasts for 50 time steps.

4.2 Baseline Methods
We chose two widely recognized and representative methods
in the field of agent modeling as baselines for our comparative
experiments. Additionally, we included a na¨ıve PPO method
that does not involve agent modeling as another baseline.

No Agent Modeling (NAM): Since this approach does not
employ any agent modeling techniques, we expect this to be
the worst of the methods. NAM merely serves as a bench-

Figure 4: Episodic evaluation returns and 95 % confidence interval
of the four evaluated methods in two scenarios.

mark to evaluate whether agent modeling methods do any-
thing to enhance the ego agent’s policy performance and, if
so, to quantify the degree of that improvement.

Policy Representation Learning in Multi-Agent System
(PR): This baseline is based on the method proposed by
[Grover et al., 2018]. The method is built on an encoder-
decoder architecture, where the encoder embeds the input ob-
servation trajectory into feature vectors in a point-wise man-
ner, yielding vectors for each time step within the trajectory.
The feature vectors are aggregated using the average pool-
ing method to obtain the trajectory’s representation. This ap-
proach generally requires modeling an ego agent’s complete
observation trajectory from a previous episode to generate the
modeled agent’s policy representation.

Local Information Agent Modeling (LIAM): This base-
line was introduced by [Papoudakis et al., 2021]. Like PR,
it employs an encoder-decoder architecture. But unlike PR,
the encoder is a recurrent encoder. The encoder takes in the
history of the ego agent’s observations and actions up to the
current time step and outputs the modeled agent’s policy rep-
resentation ct in real time during the current episode. This
method requires obtaining the modeled agent’s observations
and actions for the reconstruction task during the training
phase but only needs the ego agent’s observations and actions

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Time steps1e70.40.50.60.7RewardsLevel_based ForagingNAMCLAMPRLIAM0.00.20.40.60.81.0Time steps1e76050403020100102030RewardsPredator PreyNAMCLAMPRLIAMduring the execution.

4.3 Policy Evaluation
Fig. 4 shows the average return curves for the three baselines
and CLAM in two multi-agent environments. We trained
each method for 10 million time steps, conducting evalua-
tions every 10,000 time steps. We evaluated each method us-
ing five different random seeds. The solid lines represent the
average return values over five separate runs, while the shaded
regions indicate the 95% confidence interval. From the fig-
ure, it is evident that the NAM baseline performs the worst in
both environments, in line with our expectations. Na¨ıve rein-
forcement learning algorithms without agent modeling mod-
ules cannot acquire any auxiliary information to distinguish
between the policies of its opponents or teammates. The PR
method performed slightly better than NAM in both environ-
ments but fell short compared to the other two methods. We
attribute this outcome to the point-wise encoding approach of
PR, which does not seem to effectively capture temporal re-
lationships between trajectory steps. This limitation results
in so few informative policy representation vectors that the
model cannot accurately model the agents’ strategy features.
Hence, the representation provides little assistance in the ego
agent’s adaptive policy training. Additionally, using the aver-
age pooling method to aggregate feature vectors might not
be the optimal approach. LIAM, which employs a recur-
rent encoder, receives the second-highest returns (on aver-
age) in both scenarios. This method capitalizes on the tem-
poral information within trajectories for effective representa-
tion learning, resulting in policy representations with richer
information than PR. As can be seen, the performance im-
provement is substantial compared to the other two baselines.
CLAM achieved the highest returns in both environments
and improved na¨ıve reinforcement learning performance by
at least 28%. We reason this is due to the attention mecha-
nism, which captures long-range temporal patterns within the
trajectory sequences. Moreover, CLAM employs the mask
method in the sample augmentation step of contrastive learn-
ing. This enhances the model’s capability to identify the most
distinctive feature information within the trajectories of dif-
ferent policies, resulting in superior performance.

4.4 Model Evaluation
Continuing our analysis, we delve into why the CLAM
method achieves such remarkable performance. Utilizing
the t-SNE method [Van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008], we
projected the policy representation embeddings into a two-
dimensional space, as shown in Fig. 5a. These were the pol-
icy embeddings output by CLAM’s encoder at the 25th time
step of each episode in the Predator-prey environment. Each
color represents a different fixed policy combination for the
predator team, and each point represents an episode. From the
figure, it is apparent that points of the same color are strongly
clustered. This is a good indication that the CLAM model
can identify and differentiate the behavioral characteristics of
different predator team policies.

However, we did notice an overlap between Policy 5 and
Policy 8. Further examination reveals that these two policy
combinations inherently share similar features. As a result,

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) t-SNE projection of the embeddings in the predator-
prey environment, where different colors represent different fixed
policies and different points represent different episodes. (b) Policy
prediction accuracy.

the self-supervised contrastive learning scheme struggled to
tell them apart. Nevertheless, this underscores that CLAM
can indeed represent policies based on their behavioral simi-
larities, effectively aiding the training of adaptive cooperative
or adversarial policies through reinforcement learning.

Subsequently, we verified the rapid generation of informa-
tive real-time policy representations by freezing the policy en-
coder’s parameters and attaching a prediction head composed
of MLPs. We input the complete episodic observation trajec-
tories’ representation embeddings into the prediction head.
The prediction head uses the policy class labels as supervi-
sion signals to predict the corresponding class for each policy
representation embedding. After training, we tested the pre-
dictive accuracy of policy representations for observation tra-
jectories of lengths from 0 to 49, the idea being to validate the
model’s representation capabilities. The results appear in Fig.
5b. The solid line represents the average accuracy over five
tests, while the shaded region denotes the 95% confidence in-
terval.

From the figure, we can see that, at time step 0, the repre-
sentations are random due to the lack of sufficient temporal
information available, and so the result is an average accu-

6040200204060t-SNE-x604020020406080t-SNE-yt-SNE EmbeddingPolicy index012345678901020304050Episode Time Steps20406080100Accuracy (%)Policy Prediction AccuracyMethod \ Time step
CLAM
CLAM-avg
CLAM-unmask

10
0.89
0.94
0.89

20
0.78
0.88
0.83

30
0.75
0.85
0.81

40
0.74
0.83
0.80

50
0.74
0.82
0.79

Table 1: Intra-Inter Clustering Ratios (IICR) of policy representation
embeddings in predator-prey environment.

Our next experiment was to test the mask-based sample
augmentation technique. Comparing CLAM and CLAM-
unmask in Fig. 6, CLAM amassed higher returns. The IICR
values also suggest that CLAM outperforms CLAM-unmask
in terms of policy representation clustering. This indicates
that incorporating a maske-based asymmetric sample aug-
mentation method enhances the model’s policy representa-
tion ability. Based on our empirical insights, we conjecture
that the model is forced to rely on the remaining unmasked
portions to capture the most essential and discriminative fea-
tures. This would lead to more focused learning of the im-
portant temporal patterns and relationships within the obser-
vation trajectory. Again, the result is more robust and infor-
mative embeddings that capture the essential characteristics
of the modeled agents’ policies.

5 Conclusion

This paper presented a novel agent modeling model that
leverages a Transformer encoder and an attention-pooling
module. The model effectively captures real-time policy rep-
resentations of the modeled agents, utilizing only the obser-
vation signals from the ego agent. Importantly, our work pi-
oneers the integration of the attention mechanism into the
field of agent modeling. This innovative attention mecha-
nism empowers the proposed model to efficiently learn how
to capture useful information from the ego agent’s local ob-
servation, thereby substantially augmenting the model’s ca-
pacity for representation. Through contrastive learning, and
combined with an innovative asymmetric sample augmen-
tation technique for creating positive sample pairs, we suc-
cessfully trained a policy encoder to model agent policies in
a self-supervised manner and encouraged the model to un-
earth the most distinctive information and features within the
ego agent’s observation trajectories. Our experimental results
demonstrate that CLAM significantly increases the episodic
returns obtained by the ego agent compared to baseline meth-
ods. More importantly, in contrast to the baseline methods,
our approach stands out by eliminating the necessity to ac-
quire observations from the perspective of the modeled agent
or to rely on long-range trajectories. It exclusively relies on
In
the observations of the ego agent as the model’s input.
the future, we will use the CLAM model in human-machine
collaboration environments. The proposed approach has the
potential to enhance the versatility of multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning methods, making them applicable to scenarios
involving human-machine collaboration to achieve a common
goal, such as in manufacturing or logistics.

Figure 6: Average returns comparison of CLAM against two ablated
versions of CLAM in predator-prey environment.

racy of 10% for predicting the 10 policies. However, as the
time steps progress, the accuracy rapidly increases, reaching
around 60% at step 10, close to 80% at step 20, and surpass-
ing 90% accuracy for full trajectory representations at the fi-
nal step of 49. This demonstrates that the CLAM method can
generate informative representations early in each episode
and ensure high consistency in the representation space across
trajectory lengths.

4.5 Ablation Study
This section presents the results of an ablation study we con-
ducted to better understand the impact of different designs in
our CLAM model. Our two assessment metrics were: i) the
average returns obtained by the agents in a multi-agent envi-
ronment, and ii) the Intra-Inter Clustering Ratio (IICR) of the
policy embeddings. IICR essentially assesses the clustering
properties of feature vectors in an embedding space. It is a
valuable metric for evaluating the feature learning capability
of self-supervised methods and the discriminative power of
learned features in representing diverse sample classes. An
IIRC value of less than 1 indicates the effectiveness of the
feature representation method in aggregating similar samples
and separating dissimilar samples. The smaller the value,
the more pronounced the clustering effect and the better the
model’s representation performance.

We evaluated two ablated versions of CLAM: CLAM-avg
which replaced the attention pooling module with the aver-
age pooling method and CLAM-unmask which did not use
the mask-based sample augmentation method. Fig. 6 illus-
trates the average return curves for CLAM and CLAM-avg.
It is evident from the figure that CLAM yields higher aver-
age returns. Table 1 presents the IICR results. We scored the
policy embeddings at time steps (10, 20, 30, 40, 50). From a
comparison of the score, it is clear that the values for CLAM
are consistently lower than those of CLAM-avg, indicating its
superior representation performance. We attribute this to the
attention pooling module’s ability to better focus on crucial
temporal features in the ego agent’s observation trajectories
resulting in a more distinct aggregation of feature vectors and
ultimately yielding more informative policy representations.

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Time steps1e76050403020100102030RewardsPredator PreyCLAMCLAM-unmaskCLAM-avgReferences
[Albrecht and Stone, 2018] Stefano V Albrecht and Peter
Stone. Autonomous agents modelling other agents: A
comprehensive survey and open problems. Artificial In-
telligence, 258:66–95, 2018.

[Caron et al., 2020] Mathilde Caron,

Ishan Misra, Julien
Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand
Joulin. Unsupervised learning of visual features by con-
trasting cluster assignments. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.

[Chen et al., 2020] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Moham-
mad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework
In In-
for contrastive learning of visual representations.
ternational conference on machine learning, pages 1597–
1607. PMLR, 2020.

[Christianos et al., 2020] Filippos

Lukas
Sch¨afer, and Stefano Albrecht. Shared experience actor-
critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 33:10707–10717,
2020.

Christianos,

[Devlin et al., 2018] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Ken-
ton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

[Dosovitskiy et al., 2020] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer,
Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Min-
derer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

[Grover et al., 2018] Aditya Grover, Maruan Al-Shedivat,
Jayesh Gupta, Yuri Burda, and Harrison Edwards. Learn-
In In-
ing policy representations in multiagent systems.
ternational conference on machine learning, pages 1802–
1811. PMLR, 2018.

[Hansen et al., 2004] Eric A Hansen, Daniel S Bernstein,
and Shlomo Zilberstein. Dynamic programming for par-
In AAAI, volume 4,
tially observable stochastic games.
pages 709–715, 2004.

[He et al., 2016] He He, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Kevin Kwok,
and Hal Daum´e III. Opponent modeling in deep reinforce-
In International conference on machine
ment learning.
learning, pages 1804–1813. PMLR, 2016.

[He et al., 2020] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Sain-
ing Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsu-
pervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 9729–9738, 2020.

[Jaiswal et al., 2020] Ashish Jaiswal, Ashwin Ramesh Babu,
Mohammad Zaki Zadeh, Debapriya Banerjee, and Fillia
Makedon. A survey on contrastive self-supervised learn-
ing. Technologies, 9(1):2, 2020.

[Mordatch and Abbeel, 2018] Igor Mordatch and Pieter
Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language

In Proceedings of the AAAI

in multi-agent populations.
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[Oord et al., 2018] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol
Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
[O’Neill et al., 2022] Thomas O’Neill, Nathan McNeese,
Amy Barron, and Beau Schelble. Human–autonomy team-
ing: A review and analysis of the empirical literature. Hu-
man factors, 64(5):904–938, 2022.

[Papoudakis et al., 2020] Georgios Papoudakis,

Filippos
Christianos, Lukas Sch¨afer, and Stefano V Albrecht.
Benchmarking multi-agent deep reinforcement
learn-
arXiv preprint
ing algorithms in cooperative tasks.
arXiv:2006.07869, 2020.

[Papoudakis et al., 2021] Georgios Papoudakis,

Filippos
Christianos, and Stefano Albrecht. Agent modelling under
partial observability for deep reinforcement
learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:19210–19222, 2021.

[Rabinowitz et al., 2018] Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet,
Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and
Matthew Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, pages 4218–4227.
PMLR, 2018.

[Radford et al., 2018] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan,
Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.

[Schulman et al., 2017] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Pra-
fulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Prox-
arXiv preprint
imal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[Shoham et al., 2007] Yoav Shoham, Rob Powers,

and
Trond Grenager.
If multi-agent learning is the answer,
what is the question? Artificial intelligence, 171(7):365–
377, 2007.

[Sutton and Barto, 2018] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G
Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT
press, 2018.

[Van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008] Laurens Van der Maaten
and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal
of machine learning research, 9(11), 2008.

[Vaswani et al., 2017] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki
Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017.

[Wang et al., 2022] Xiao Wang, Haoqi Fan, Yuandong Tian,
Daisuke Kihara, and Xinlei Chen. On the importance of
In Pro-
asymmetry for siamese representation learning.
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 16570–16579, 2022.

