The 5  Iranian Conference on Renewable Energy & Distributed Generation (ICREDG2017) – University of Guilan 

th

Development of a Multi-Agent System for Optimal 
Sizing of a Commercial Complex Microgrid  

Soheil Mohseni  
Department of Electrical Engineering, University Campus 2, 
University of Guilan  
Rasht, Iran 
soheilmohseni92@gmail.com 

Seyed Masoud Moghaddas Tafreshi  
Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of 
Engineering, University of Guilan 
Rasht, Iran 
tafreshi@guilan.ac.ir

Abstract—In this paper, a novel intelligent method based on a 
multi-agent  system  (MAS)  is  applied  to  the  problem  of  optimal 
sizing  in  a  stand-alone  office  complex  microgrid  such  that  the 
electricity  demand  of  the  office  building  and  the  charging 
demand  of  the  plug-in  hybrid  electric  vehicle  (PHEV)  charging 
station  are  met.  The  proposed  MAS-based  architecture  consists 
of five different agents, namely generation agent (GA), electrical 
load  agent  (LA),  PHEV  charging  station  agent  (SA),  control 
agent (CA), and design agent (DA) which are organized in three 
levels.  In  the  proposed  MAS,  control  agent  coordinates  the 
interactions between the generation agent and electrical load and 
charging  station  agents  and  following  a  request  from  design 
agent,  sends  the  information  on  the  operation  of  the  microgrid 
with  determined  sizes 
the  received 
information, design agent  finds the optimal sizes of the system’s 
components  such  that  the  electricity  and  charging  demands  are 
met  considering  two  reliability  indices  to  investment  decisions. 
This study is performed for Kish Island in the Persian Gulf.  

it.  According 

to 

to 

Keywords—Renewable energy; microgrid; solar; optimal sizing; 

multi-agent system; PHEV charging station. 

I.   INTRODUCTION  

technologies  will 

Residential and commercial buildings consume about 32% 
of the global energy use. They are responsible for about 30% 
of  the  total  end-use  energy-related  CO2  emissions,  if  the 
indirect  upstream  emissions  are  considered 
[1].  The 
integration  of  local  distributed  energy  resources  (DERs)  and 
more  efficient 
further 
electrification  in  buildings.  From  the  grid  point  of  view, 
photovoltaic (PV) systems and electric vehicles (EVs) have an 
increased  grid  impact.  Furthermore,  EVs  have  a  certain 
flexibility  to  shift  their  electricity  consumption  and  they  can 
facilitate 
the 
penetration  of  distributed  generation  and  the  presence  of 
multiple  distributed  generators  in  electrical  proximity  to  one 
another have brought about the concept of the microgrid [2]. 

integration  of  RES.  The 

increase 

in  a 

result 

the 

in 

Flexible  charging  of  EVs  allows  to  coordinate  the  EV 
charging;  hence  several  coordination  scales  of  the  EV 
integration  have  been  investigated  in  the  literature  [3]:  The 
vehicle,  building,  residential  distribution,  and  transmission 
grid  scale.  In  [4],  a  microgrid  model  has  been  built  with 
commercial  building  load,  PV  array  generation,  and  bi-

directional  EV  charging/discharging  stations  which  aims  to 
minimize the charging cost of EVs and power deviation of the 
microgrid.  An  online  energy  management  of  PV-assisted 
charging  station  under  time-of-use  pricing  is  investigated  in 
[5] and a workplace parking lot is simulated as an example to 
test  the  method.  A  new  analytical  approach  to  determine  the 
size of PHEV charging stations powered by various levels of 
commercial PV penetration is proposed in [6] which can find 
the optimal size of PV-powered charging stations.  

Intelligent multi-agent based modeling of power systems is 
a  promising  approach  to  provide  a  common  communication 
interface  for  all  agents  representing  the  autonomous  physical 
elements  in  the  power  system.  Furthermore,  the  distributed 
nature  and  potential  for  modeling  autonomous  decision 
making  entities  in  solving  complex  problems  motivates  the 
use  of  MAS  for  the  operation  of  the  modern  power  systems 
through implementing smart grid techniques [7]. According to 
the aforementioned benefits of using MAS for the operation of 
microgrids,  optimal  sizing  of  the  components  of  microgrids 
based  on  the  MAS-based  energy  management  of  them  is 
necessary.  In  this  regard,  in  [8],  an  intelligent  multi  agent 
system  has  been  successfully  applied  to  the  design  of  a 
decentralized  energy  management  system  for  an  autonomous 
polygeneration microgrid (APM) technology.   

In  this  paper,  the  optimal  sizing  problem  of  an  office 
complex  microgrid  is  considered  which  is  equipped  with 
photovoltaic/fuel  cell  generation,  hydrogen  storage,  and  a 
PHEV charging station. For this purpose, a multi-agent system 
is suggested that finds the optimal sizes of the components by 
mean  of  particle  swarm  optimization  (PSO)  The  considered 
energy  management  strategy  in  the  proposed  MAS  controls 
the  charging  of  PHEVs  depending  on  the  hour  of  the  day  to 
reduce  cost  and  avoid  overload  during  peak  hours.  In  this 
paper, gasoline is considered as the second fuel of the PHEVs.  

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section II, 
configuration  of  the  microgrid  is  presented.  Section  III 
describes  the  multi-agent  architecture  used  for  optimal  sizing 
along  with  the  description  of  components  belonging  to  each 
agent. Section IV presents the simulation results of the MAS-
based  architecture  used  for  optimal  sizing  of  the  microgrid. 
Finally, the conclusion of this study is presented in section V.  

 
 
 
II.  CONFIGURATION OF THE MICROGRID 

Power flow diagram of the proposed microgrid is shown in 
Fig.  1.  According  to  this  diagram,  the  output  power  of  the 
photovoltaic  unit  is  equal  to  PPV  that  depends  on  the  solar 
radiation.  When  the  output  power  of  PV  arrays  is  more  than 
electricity  demand  of  the  office  (Pload),  the  surplus  power     
(PPV-sta)  which  can  be  less  than  the  required  charging  demand 
of the station (Psta), will be used for charging the PHEVs. After 
charging  the  PHEVs,  if  there  is  more  surplus  power,  this 
surplus power (PPV-el) will be used in electrolyzer to electrolyze 
the water  and  the produced  hydrogen  which  has the  power of 
Pel-tank,  will  be  stored  in  the  hydrogen  tank.  If  the  injected 
power  to  the  electrolyzer,  exceeds  electrolyzer’s  rated  power, 
then the excess energy will circulate in a dump resistor. On the 
other hand, when the output power of the PV arrays is less than 
the  electricity  demand  of  the  office  building,  then  fuel  cell 
consumes  the  stored  hydrogen  in  the  hydrogen  tank  to  the 
amount  of  Ptank-fc  and  compensates  the  shortage  of  the  power 
production.  If  the  shortage  of  power  exceeds  fuel  cell’s  rated 
power or the stored hydrogen cannot afford that, some fraction 
of  the  electricity  demand  of  the  office  must  be  shed  which 
leads to loss of load. 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the proposed microgrid system 

III.  MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM 

The  considered  MAS  for  optimal  sizing  of  the  proposed 
microgrid  has  five  agents,  namely  generation  agent,  electrical 
load  agent,  charging  station  agent,  control  agent,  and  design 
agent  which  are  organized  in  three  levels.  These  three  levels 
are presented in Fig. 3. 

All 

the  agents  associated  with 

the  generation  or 
consumption  of  electricity  belong  to  the  field  level,  which  is 
the  lowest  level  of  the  considered  architecture  for  the  MAS. 
GA, LA, and SA belong to this level. In the coordination level, 

coordination  of  the  generation  of  electricity  and  consumption 
of the electrical loads obtains. CA belongs to this level. Design 
level is the highest level of the proposed architecture that finds 
the  optimal  sizes  of  the  components  according  to  the 
interactions  with  coordination  level  such  that  the  electricity 
demand of the office building  and the charging  demand of its 
station are met. In the proposed MAS, DA belongs to this level. 
The  communication  channels  for  data  exchange  in  the 
proposed MAS is shown in Fig. 2.  

Fig. 2. Data exchange in the MAS 

A.  Generation agent 

 This agent is responsible for management of the resources 
of  the  microgrid.  Generation  resources  of  the  microgrid 
include  PV  arrays  and  the  fuel  cell.  Also,  this  agent  has  an 
electrolyzer and a hydrogen tank to provide hydrogen for the 
fuel  cell  and  uses  a  hydrogen  tank  as  a  storage  unit. 
Generation agent perceives the amount of power produced by 
PV arrays and the amount of hydrogen stored in the hydrogen 
tank  by  using  the  sensors.  Producing  hydrogen  by  adjusting 
the operation point of the electrolyzer, generation of electricity 
in the fuel cell by discharging the hydrogen tank and adjusting 
the  operation  point  of  the  fuel  cell  and  also  sending  the 
information on the operation of its components to the control 
agent are its actions.  

1)  Components under the supervision of generation agent: 
Modeling of the components which are under the supervision 
of generation agent is presented in the following subsections. 

a) PV arrays: The output power of the PV generator can 

be calculated according to the following equation [9]: 

PPV g NPV Am Gt,                              (1) 

where g  is  the  instantaneous  PV  generator  efficiency  that  is 
considered  to  be  15.4%  in  this  paper  [9],  Am  is  the  area  of  a 
single module used in the system (m2) which is considered to 
be  1.9  m2  in  this  paper  [9],  Gt    is  the  total  global  irradiance 
incident on the titled plane (W/m2), and NPV  is the number of 
modules. In this analysis, each PV array has a rated power of 1 
kW.  The  capital  cost  of  1  unit  is  $2000  [9],  while  the 
replacement  and  maintenance  costs  are  taken  as  $1800,  and 

 
 
 
 
$0/yr,  respectively.  The  lifetime  of  a  PV  array  is  taken  to  be 
20 years [10]. 

e)  DC/AC converter: The power electronic circuit used 
to convert DC into AC is known as inverter. The DC input to 
the inverter can be from any of the following sources: 

b) Fuel cell: Proton exchange membrane fuel cell is an 
environmentally  clean  power  generator  which  combines 
hydrogen fuel with oxygen from air to produce electricity. The 
efficiency of the fuel cell is fed to the computational program 
as  the  input.  Fuel  cell’s  output  power  can  be  defined  by  the 
following equation: 

  DC output of the PV generation system 

  DC output of the fuel cell power system 

In  this  analysis,  a  1  kW  system  is  associated  with  $700 
capital  [9],  $650  replacement,  and  $7/yr  maintenance  cost. 
The converter’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to be 15 
years and 90%, respectively [10]. 

PFC-conv Ptank-FC  FC.                              (2)                                          

The capital, replacement, and maintenance costs are taken 
as  $2000  [9],  $1500,  and  $100/yr  for  a  1  kW  system, 
respectively.  The  FC’s  lifetime  and  efficiency  are  considered 
to be 5 years and 50%, respectively [10]. 

c) Electrolyzer:  Electrolysis  to  dissociate  water  into  its 
separate hydrogen and oxygen constituents has been in use for 
decades, primarily to meet industrial chemical needs. 

The  electrolyzer’s  output  power  can  be  calculated  by  the 

following equation: 

Pel-tank PPV-el  el,                           (3) 

In  this  analysis,  a  1  kW  system  is  associated  with  $1500 
capital  [9],  $1000  replacement,  and  $15/yr  maintenance  cost. 
The electrolyzer’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to be 
20 years and 75%, respectively [10]. 

d) Hydrogen tank: The energy of hydrogen stored in the 

tank at time step t is obtained by the following equation: 

Etank(t)Etank(t-1) Pel-tank(t) t  Ptank-FC(t)  storage t, 

                                           (4)   

where storage  is the efficiency of the storage system which is 
assumed to be 95%, and t  is the duration of each step time 
which is equal to one hour. 

To  calculate  the  mass  of  stored  hydrogen  in  the  tank,  the 

following equation can be used [10]: 

mstorage(t) = Etank(t) / HHVH2,                       (5) 

where HHVH2  is the higher heating value of hydrogen which is 
equal  to  39.7  kWh/kg  [10].  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  there 
are lower and upper limits for amount of the stored hydrogen. 
It is not possible that the mass of stored hydrogen exceeds the 
rated capacity of the tank. On the other hand, because of some 
problems, e.g. hydrogen pressure drop, a small fraction of the 
hydrogen (here, 5%) may not be extracted. This fraction is the 
lower limit of the stored hydrogen.  

In  this  analysis,  a  1  kg  system  is  associated  with  $500 
capital  [9],  $450  replacement,  and  $5/yr  maintenance  cost. 
The hydrogen tank’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to 
be 20 years and 95%, respectively [10]. 

2)  Simulation  algorithm  of  the  generation  agent:  This 
agent, by coordination of the control agent, interacts with LA 
and  SA    in  order  to  supply  the  electricity  and  charging 
demands  of  the  microgrid.  In  this  regard,  first  CA  sends  the 
sizes of PV arrays,  electrolyzer, hydrogen tank, fuel cell, and 
DC/AC  converter  that  are  determined  by  the  DA,  to  the  GA 
and at each time step t, asks it for next hour value of the output 
power of PV arrays. Then, GA sends the requested data to the 
control agent.  

In this paper, it is assumed that GA acts such that when it 
receives the request of storing the surplus power from the CA, 
it  will  use  the  excess  energy  in  electrolyzer  and  stores  the 
produced  hydrogen  in  the  tank.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the 
GA  receives  the  request  of  supplying  the  shortage  of 
production from the CA, it uses the stored hydrogen in the fuel 
cell to compensate the shortage of the power production. 

B.  Electical load agent 

 Electrical  load  agent  is  a  simple  reflex  agent  that 
aggregates  all  of  the  electricity  consumptions  of  the  office 
building  except 
the  electricity  consumption  needed  for 
charging  the  PHEVs.  The  electrical  loads  that  LA  is 
responsible for forecasting them are uninterruptable loads and 
should  be  supplied  subject  to  a  reliability  constraint.  The 
aggregated  electricity  demand  of  the  office  building  is 
considered  as  the  only  percept  of  this  agent  and  sending  the 
aggregated electricity demand to the control agent is the only 
action of it.  

C.  PHEV charging station agent 

Charging  station  agent  is  responsible  for  charging  the 
PHEVs  that  arrive  at  the  station  on  workdays  and  sends  the 
forecasted charging demands to the control agent. The number 
of  PHEVs  that  arrive  at  the  station  and  required  charging 
demand of them are the percepts of it and charging the arrived 
PHEVs  to  the  desired  level  of  the  customer  and  sending  the 
charging  demand  and  uncharged  energy  of  PHEVs  in  the 
predetermined time to the control agent are its actions. 

In  order  to  charge  a  PHEV’s  battery,  electric  vehicle 
supply  equipment  (EVSE)  is  considered.  For  simplicity,  it  is 
assumed  that  PHEVs  arrive  in  time  interval  [0,T1]  and  all 
PHEVs have the same deadline T2 (T2 > T1) corresponding to 
the  evening  departure  time  for  all  employees.  Also,  it  is 
assumed that each PHEV charges at a constant rate  = 4 kW 

 
until  it  is  charged  to  the  level  desired  by  the  customer.  The 
charging level required by each PHEV is uniformly distributed 
between 0 and 10.4 kW. 

supplying  the  electrical  load  of  the  building,  allowing  the 
station  agent  to  charge  the  PHEVs  by  the  surplus  power  and 
sending its percepts to the DA are the actions of control agent. 

In  this  analysis,  SmartCharge-12000  is  chosen  as  EVSE 
which is fully programmable and  open source. This EVSE is 
designed and manufactured by Electric Motor Werks which is 
a high-performance electric conversion group [11]. The capital 
cost  of  each  EVSE  is  $2000  [11],  while  the  replacement  and 
maintenance  costs  are 
taken  as  $1800,  and  $20/yr, 
respectively.  The  lifetime  of  each  EVSE  is  taken  to  be  20 
years and the efficiency of each EVSE (sta) is considered to 
be 90% [11]. 

1)  Simulation algorithm of the station agent: It is assumed 
that unmanaged charging profile of the station is available for 
a  year  which  can  be  managed  to  follow  the  solar  power 
according  to  the  proposed  PHEV  charging  coordination 
method, thereby  reducing the cost of microgrid.  This  method 
is such that when the allocated electrical power by CA for the 
station (PPV-sta) meets the requested charging load (Psta / sta), 
SA  does  not  receive  any  requests  and  only  sends  the 
information on the operation of its EVSEs to the control agent. 
On  the  other  hand,  When  PPV-sta  is  less  than  the  requested 
charging load or it is equal to zero, this agent first checks that 
whether the current time step is equal to the evening departure 
time  of  the  PHEVs  or  not.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  this  agent 
calculates 
the 
the  uncharged  energy  of  PHEVs 
predetermined time (Qsta) according to (6) and sends it to the 
control agent. 

in 

Qsta = (Psta / sta)  PPV-sta.                      (6) 

On the other hand, if the current time step is not equal to 
T2,  station  agent  updates  the  charging  demand  of  the  rest  of 
the  current  day,  which  are  expressed  by  the  set  of  numbers 
{Psta (t+1), … ,  Psta (T2+24n)}, by  adding a  constant  value of  
((Psta / sta)  PPV-sta) / ((T2 + 24n)  t )   to each of them and 
sends the updated values of charging load to the control agent 
at  the  next  time  steps.  n  in  the  proposed  set  of  numbers 
represents the number of the day and the term (T2 + 24n)  t 
represents  the  difference  of  the  departure  time  of  a  specific 
day from the current time step. 

Furthermore, in both of the above cases, this agent at each 
time  step  t  sends  the  information  on  the  operation  of  its 
EVSEs to the control agent. 

D.  Control agent 

Control  agent  coordinates  the  interactions  between  the 
generation  agent  and  electrical  load  and  station  agents.  This 
agent perceives the amount of power produced by PV arrays, 
charging  demands  of  the  office  building  and  PHEV  charging 
station,  uncharged  energy  of  PHEVs,  and  the  information  on 
the operation of the microgrid. CA perceives this information 
by receiving them from GA, LA, and SA. Requesting the GA 
to store the surplus power produced by PV arrays, Requesting 
the  GA  to  provide  the  shortage  of  power  production  for 

1)  Simulation  algorithm  of  the  control  agent:  This  agent, 
after  receiving  a  request  for  operating  the  microgrid  with 
determined sizes from DA and sending the related sizes to the 
GA and SA, at each time step t, requests GA for the next hour 
sun radiation, requests LA for the next hour electricity demand 
of  the  office  building,  and  requests  SA  for  the  next  hour 
charging load needed for charging the PHEVS. After receiving 
the aforementioned data from GA, LA, and SA, control agent 
establishes the the following equation: 

P  PPV   (Pload / conv)  (Psta / sta).               (7)  

When  P  is  positive,  CA  asks  GA  to  store  the  surplus 
power  of  P  and  satisfies  charging  demand  of  the  station. 
When P is zero, CA does not send any request to the GA and 
satisfies charging demand of the station. When P is negative, 
in order to  check whether output power of the PV arrays can 
satisfy the electricity demand of the office building or not, this 
agent establishes the following equation: 

P  PPV   (Pload / conv).                      (8) 

In  this  situation,  when  P’  is  positive,  it  means  that 
output  power  of  PV  arrays  can  satisfy  electrical  load  of  the 
building and the allocated power for charging PHEVs will be 
equal to P’. When P’ is equal to zero, it means that output 
power  of  PV  arrays  can  satisfy  the  electrical  load  of  the 
building,  but  no  power  should  be  allocated  for  charging  the 
PHEVs.  Also,  when  P’  is  negative,  it  means  that  output 
power  of  PV  arrays  cannot  supply  the  power  needed  by  LA. 
Therefore, CA requests the GA to compensate the shortage of 
power and does not allocate any power to the station. Also, in 
all of the above cases CA informs the SA about the decision 
made. 

After  receiving  the  information  on  the  operation  of  the 
generation and storage components of the microgrid from the 
GA, when CA finds that electricity demand of the office is not 
met,  it  calculates  the  loss  of  electrical  load  of  the  office 
building, Qload(t), according to the following equation: 

loadQ 

t(

loadP) = 

,)t(genP ) t(

(9)

where  Pgen(t)  is  total  generation  of  the  considered  distributed 
energy resources. 

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  aforementioned  procedure 
ensures that the charging demand will be provided only by the 
surplus power of the PV arrays. 

Finally, CA after the receipt of a request for operating the 
microgrid  with  determined  sizes  from  DA,  by  applying  the 
above procedure, sends the information on the operation of the 
microgrid containing Qload and Qsta to the design agent. 

                         
E.  Design  agent 

Design agent has the highest level in the architecture of the 
proposed MAS and it  is responsible for optimal sizing of the 
components of microgrid. The percepts of this agent are same 
as control  agent.  Requesting the  control agent  for sending its 
percepts at each time step and minimizing the net present cost 
function of the microgrid through particle swarm optimization 
with the goal of finding the optimal sizes of the components of 
the microgrid are the actions of design agent. 

1)  System’s  cost:  In  this  paper  the  capital,  replacement, 
and  maintenance  costs  of  each  component  of  the  microgrid 
have been considered and net present cost (NPC) is chosen for 
the  calculation  of  the  system’s  cost.  The  NPC  for  a  specific 
device can be expressed by the following equation. 

NPCi  Ni  (CCi+RCi  Ki + MCi  PWA(ir,R)),     (10) 

where: 

N 

Number of units and/or the unit capacity (kW or kg) 

CC 

Capital investment cost ($/unit) 

K 

Single payment present worth 

RC 

Replacement cost ($/unit) 

MC  Maintenance and repair cost ($/unit.yr) 

PWA  Present worth annual payment 

ir 

R 

Real interest rate (6%) 

Project lifetime (20 years) 

2)  The objective function: The objective function is sum of 

all net present costs:  

NPC = NPCPV + NPCel + NPCtank + NPCFC + NPCconv + 
                 NPCsta                                                                    (11) 

3)  Reliability:  To evaluate  the reliability of supplying the 
electrical load of the building and charging load of the station, 
the equivalent loss factor (ELF) index is used. The ELF index 
for electrical load of the office building and charging load can 
be calculated by the following equations: 

ELFload = 

(Qload(t) / Pload(t)),           (12) 

ELFsta = 

(Qsta(t) / Psta(t)),             (13) 

where  the  number  261  indicates  the  number  of  evening 
departure times which is equal to the number of working days  
in  2016.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  using  the  number  of 
evening departure times in  (13) is because of that  there is no 
charging  load  in  non-working  days  and  charging  load  is 
considered as the deferrable load on working hours. 

4)  Simulation  algorithm  of  the  design  agent:  After  the 
determination of the sizes of the components through PSO by 
this agent, the determined sizes of the components will be sent 
to the CA. Accordingly, CA sends the determined sizes of the 
components to the GA and SA. Then, CA coordinates the GA 
with LA and SA and sends the information on the operation of 
the  microgrid  to  the  DA.  After  receiving  the  aforementioned 
information,  DA  calculates  the  objective  function  and  ELF 
indices  for  electricity  demand  of  the  office  building  and 
charging  demand  of  the  station.  If  ELFload  is  less  than  0.01, 
ELFsta is less than 0.1, and the energy content of the tank at the 
end  of  a  year  is  not  less  than  its  initial  energy,  then  design 
agent selects the obtained sizes as optimum sizes. 

IV.  SIMULATION RESULTS 

In  this  section,  the  proposed  MAS-based  architecture  for 
optimal  sizing  of  the  components  of  the  proposed  office 
complex microgrid is simulated and the optimum combination 
of  the  components  is  calculated.  The  simulation  of  the 
proposed MAS is performed using MATLAB software.  

The  annual  solar  radiation  data  belongs  to  Kish  Island  in 
the  Persian  Gulf  captured  by  one  sample  per  hour  precision 
that  is  obtained  with  HOMER  software.  For  coordinates  in 
HOMER,  2632’  N  latitude  and  5358’  E  longitude  are  used 
which are the coordinates of Kish Island. 

The  annual  load  curve  belongs  to  a  2000  square  meters 
office building in Kish Island. The annual load pattern of this 
building has a peak value of 60 kW and is shown in Fig. 3. 

Fig. 3. Annual load curve of the office building 

Simulations  are  done  in  two  scenarios.  In  scenario1, 
charging  demand  of  the  station  is  considered  as  a  fixed  load 
and  the  MAS  is  simulated  without  controlling  the  charging 
demand. In scenario2, it is assumed that the considered energy 
management  strategy  in  the  proposed  MAS  controls  the 
charging of PHEVs depending on the hour of the day. 

A.  Scenario1:  In  this  scenario,  charging  demand  is 
considered as a fixed load which is shown in Fig. 4. Results of 
optimal  sizing  problem  through  the  MAS  by  considering  the 
charging  demand  of  the  station  as  a  fixed  load  is  shown  in 
Table I. In this scenario, the total cost is equal to $1,639,700. 

87601.t2611.t 
 
system,  which  in  turn  decreases  the  total  cost  of  the  system. 
This  is because of that the cost of reduced number of PVs is 
more  than  the  cost  of  added  EVSEs  and  higher  capacity 
hydrogen  sub-system.  In  the  proposed  MAS,  the  reason 
behind decreasing the number of PVs is that it uses an energy 
management strategy that avoids overload during peak hours, 
the  reason  behind  increasing  the  number  of  EVSEs  is  that 
station  agent  needs  more  EVSEs  so  that  it  can  charge  the 
arrived PHEVs in less time, and the reason behind increasing 
the capacity of hydrogen sub-system is that the number of PV 
arrays  is  decreased  and  at  some  time  steps,  more  energy 
should be supplied through hydrogen sub-system to fulfill the 
power needs of building. Also, there is not much difference in 
the determined capacity of the converter in the two scenarios, 
because the electrical load of the building is not deferrable. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

In this paper, development of a multi-agent system for the 
optimal  sizing  of  an  islanded  office  microgrid  is  considered. 
The main problem of renewable energy sources is that they are 
dependent on environmental conditions, so they cannot cover 
the  demand  perfectly.  Entering  the  hydrogen  sub-system 
solves this problem significantly. It is observed that according 
to the considered energy management strategy in the proposed 
MAS  and  controlled  charging  system,  overloading  can  be 
avoided  by  shifting  charging  demand  to  off  peak  hours  and 
therefore, overall cost of the microgrid can be reduced. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

International  Energy  Agency,  Energy  Technology  Perspectives  2012: 
Pathways to a Clean Energy System. Paris, France: OECD/IEA, 2012. 
[2]  R. Lasseter, A. Akhil, C. Marnay, J. Stephens, J. Dagle, R. Guttromson, 
A.  Meliopoulos,  R.  Yinger,  and  J.  Eto,  “White  paper  on  integration  of 
distributed  energy  resources,”  in  Proc.  Consortium  Elect.  Reliab. 
Technol. Solutions, 2002, pp. 1-27. 

[3]  N. Leemput, J. Van Roy, F. Geth, P. Tant, and J. Driesen, “Comparative 
analysis  of  coordination  strategies  for  electric  vehicles,”  in Proc.  IEEE 
PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies , Manchester, 2011, pp. 1-8. 

[4]  C.  Cao,  M.  Cheng,  and  B.  Chen,  “Optimal  scheduling  of  PEV 
charging/discharging  in  microgrids  with  combined  objectives,”  Smart 
Grid and Renewable Energy, vol. 7, pp. 115-130, April 2016. 

[5]  N. Liu, F. Zou, L. Wang, CH. Wang, ZH. Chen, and Q. Chen, “Online 
energy  management  of  PV-assisted  charging  station  under  time-of-use 
pricing,” Electric Power Systesms Research, vol. 137, pp. 76-85, 2016. 

[6]  D. Q. Hung, ZH. Dong, and H.  Trinh, “Determining the size of PHEV 
charging  stations  powered  by  commercial  grid-integrated  PV  systems 
considering reactive power support,” Applied Energy, vol. 183, pp. 160-
169, Dec. 2016. 

[7]  T.  Logenthiran,  D.  Srinivasan,  A.  Khambadkone,  and  H.  Aung, 
“Multiagent  system  for  real-time  operation  of  a  microgrid  in  real-time 
digital simulator,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol.  3, pp. 925-933, 2012. 

[8]  C-S.  Karavas,  G.  Kyriakarakos,  KG.  Arvanitis,  and  G.  Papadakis,  “  A 
multi-agent  decentralized  energy  management  system  based  on 
distributed  intelligence  for  the  design  and  control  of  autonomous 
Polygeneration  microgrids,”  Energy  Conversion  and  Management,  vol.  
103, pp. 166-179, Oct. 2015. 

[9]  M.  Smaoui,  A.  Abdelkafi,  and  L.  Krichen,  “Optimal  sizing  of  a  stand-
a 

alone  photovoltaic/wind/hydrogen  hybrid 
desalination unit,” Solar Energy, vol. 120, pp. 263-276,  Oct. 2015. 
[10]  S. Dehghan, B. Kiani, A. Kazemi, and A. Parizad, “Optimal sizing of a 
hybrid  wind/PV  plant  considering  reliability  indices,”  World  Academy 
of Science, Eng. and Technology, vol. 56, pp. 527-535, Aug. 2009. 

supplying 

system 

[11]  [Online]. Available: http:// www.emotorwerks.com 

Fig. 4. Annual load curve of the station 

TABLE I.  

OPTIMAL SIZES OF THE COMPONENTS IN SCENARIO1 

Electrolyzer 
(kW) 

PV 

Hydrogen 
tank 
 (kg) 

Fuel cell 
(kW) 

DC/AC 
converter
(kW) 

EVSE 

384 

49.73 

52.63 

48.31 

53.59 

34 

A.  Scenario2:  Results  of  optimal  sizing  problem  through  the 
proposed MAS by considering the charging demand of the 
station  as  a  deferrable  load  is  shown  in  Table  II.  In  this 
scenario, the total cost is equal to $1,571,900. 

TABLE II.  

OPTIMAL SIZES OF THE COMPONENTS IN SCENARIO2 

Electrolyzer 
(kW) 

PV 

Hydrogen 
tank 
 (kg) 

Fuel cell 
(kW) 

DC/AC 
converter
(kW) 

EVSE 

318 

53.48 

58.39 

52.21 

53.97 

53 

System’s  cost  in  terms  of  the  iterations  for  the  two 

scenarios is shown in Fig. 5. 

Fig. 5. Total cost in terms of the iterations 

Results  show  that  using  the  proposed  flexible  charging 
method  in  the  MAS,  decreases  the  optimal  size  of  PV  arrays 
and  increases  the  optimal  size  of  EVSEs  and  hydrogen  sub-

 
 
 
 
 
 
