Reciprocal Collision Avoidance for General
Nonlinear Agents using Reinforcement Learning

Hao Li1, Bowen Weng1, Abhishek Gupta1, Jia Pan2, and Wei Zhang3

0
2
0
2

r
a

M
3

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

2
v
7
8
8
0
1
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Finding feasible and collision-free paths for mul-
tiple nonlinear agents is challenging in the decentralized sce-
narios due to limited information of other agents and complex
dynamics constraints. In this paper, we propose a fast multi-
agent collision avoidance algorithm for general nonlinear agents
with continuous action space, where each agent observes only
positions and velocities of nearby agents. To reduce online
computation, we ﬁrst decompose the multi-agent scenario and
solve a two agents collision avoidance problem using reinforce-
ment learning (RL). When extending the trained policy to a
multi-agent problem, safety is ensured by introducing linear
constraints from the optimal reciprocal collision avoidance
(ORCA) and the overall collision avoidance action could be
found through a simple convex optimization. Most existing
RL-based multi-agent collision avoidance algorithms rely on
the direct control of agent velocities. In sharp contrasts, our
approach is applicable to general nonlinear agents. Realis-
tic simulations based on nonlinear bicycle agent models are
performed with various challenging scenarios,
indicating a
competitive performance of the proposed method in avoiding
collisions, congestion and deadlock with smooth trajectories.

I. INTRODUCTION

Multi-agent navigation is an important topic in robotics
with many potential real-world applications such as service
robots, logistic robotics, search and rescue, and self-driving
car, among many others. One of the main challenges in
designing navigation algorithms is on the design of a real-
time control policy that satisﬁes safety requirements while
respecting the dynamics of each agent.

General multi-agent navigation algorithms can be cate-
gorized into centralized algorithms and decentralized ones.
The centralized algorithm considers all agents and the envi-
ronment as a whole system [1], [2]. A centralized decision
maker is in charge of the monitoring and control of all
the agents in the system. In practice, such a centralized
approach may encounter many issues. First, this method
heavily relies on fast communication and computation, hence
is very sensitive to signal delay, which is common in real-
world implementations. Second, whenever the central agent
fails, all the agents would lose control and may lead to
collisions. Finally,
the centralized algorithm often scales
poorly to large-scale systems.

Contrary to centralized approaches, decentralized algo-
rithms allow each agent to make decision independently by

1Hao Li, Bowen Weng, Abhishek Gupta are with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA. (e-mail: {li.7857, weng.172, gupta.706}@osu.edu)

2Jia Pan is with the Department of Computer Science, The University of

Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (email: panjia1983@gmail.com)

3Wei Zhang is with SUSTech Institute of Robotics, Southern University

of Science and Technology, China. (email: zhangw3@sustech.edu.cn)

taking into account the limited information from sensors and
communications. Similar to many studies in the literature, in
this paper, we consider the realistic case where there is no
real-time communication among agents. This directly leads
to one obvious challenge, namely, prediction of the intents
and actions of other agents. One of the most popular methods
to handle this problem is the so-called optimal reciprocal
collision avoidance (ORCA) [3]. Instead of explicitly making
predictions regarding other agents, ORCA provides a safety
guarantee by computing linear velocity constraints for each
agent. It is based on the idea of velocity obstacles (VO) [4],
[5]. By introducing a pair of linear constraints in the velocity
space for each pair of nearby agents, the ORCA method
transforms the collision avoidance problem into a linear
programming problem that can be solved efﬁciently. Notice
that the original ORCA method assumes the agent model is
a simple single integrator, where the velocity of agents can
be directly controlled and changed instantaneously, which
may not be realistic for real robots. The ORCA method
has been extended to more general cases, including second-
order system with acceleration control [6], dynamics with
continuity constraints [7], differential drive robots [8], car-
like robots [9] and heterogeneous system of various types
of agent dynamics [10]. Most of such works are designed
to certain speciﬁc dynamics and controllers. They transfer
the control of agents to the velocity space by using ﬁxed
tracking controllers, which take velocity reference as input.
Although the method in [10] can be applied to general
nonlinear systems, it assumes that each agent could observe
actions of the other agents, which conﬁnes the application to
agents with very simple dynamics. In addition, all ORCA-
based methods require preferred velocities or control from
a high-level planning module. If the planning is not well
designed, the generated trajectories could be very unnatural,
and sometimes leads to deadlock behaviors [11].

Another approach to handle the multi-agent navigation is
using reinforcement learning (RL) [12]–[16]. While it has
been demonstrated that RL can solve the optimal control
problem of complex nonlinear dynamics [17], the problem
nature of multi-agent navigation has presented several key
challenges. First, the number of agents involved in the plan-
ning period is dynamically varying, and could be different
from the number of agents used for training. To address
this problem, the authors in [12] proposed to train a value
function with two agents, and then extend the obtained policy
to the multi-agent case by selecting the action that maxi-
mizes the minimum of pairwise value functions. Symmetric
network is introduced in [13] and long short-term memory

 
 
 
 
 
 
(LSTM) neural network is used to handle this problem [14].
The laser scanner data is also adopted as observation state
in [15] and [16]. However, most of the aforementioned
studies are restricted to discrete action space, and require
rather complex neural networks with demanding training
process. Besides, they all assume that velocities of robots
could be directly controlled, which limits their applications
to robots with more complex nonlinear dynamics. Another
key issue of in RL-based approaches is the difﬁculty in pro-
viding safety guarantees. The performance is often limited to
scenarios encountered during training. In fact, to the best of
our knowledge, most existing RL-based multi-agent collision
avoidance methods do not systematically incorporate safety.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient RL-based algorithm
to solve multi-agent collision avoidance problem with a
systematic consideration of safety of the overall system.
Our approach is designed for robots with general nonlinear
dynamics, where each agent can only observe positions
and velocities of nearby robots. We ﬁrst decompose our
problem into a two agents collision avoidance problem with
continuous action space. Then we handle the multi-agent
collision avoidance problem by solving a simple convex
optimization with safety constraints from ORCA. The main
contributions of this work are summarized below:

• General Nonlinear Agents: Unlike other RL-based ap-
proaches that assume velocities of robots could be directly
controlled, or other ORCA-based approaches that need
speciﬁc models and controllers, our approach works for
general nonlinear systems with continuous action space.
• Improved Safety: Different from other RL-based ap-
proaches which only consider safety in reward function
design, our approach incorporates safety bounds system-
atically by introducing linear constraints obtained from
ORCA. In Section IV-C, we demonstrate the safety of
our algorithm with complex and challenging tasks.
• Lightweight Structure: Through decomposing the prob-
lem into a two agents collision avoidance problem, we
signiﬁcantly simplify the RL training task. The learning
process of our approach is much faster and the neural
network is much smaller when compared with other RL-
based approaches.

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION

We consider a collision avoidance problem for M nonlin-

ear agents with the following dynamics:
(cid:40)

k, ai

k),

k+1 = f (si
si
yi
k = h(si
k),

(1)

where f (·, ·) is the nonlinear state-transition function, and
h(·) is the output function. We denote the state of the i-th
k ∈ A ⊂
agent at discrete time k with si
Rm denote its own action at time k, where i = 1, 2, . . . , M.
Here S and A represent convex constraints in state space
and action space, respectively. The output of the system is
k ∈ Rd and
k], which consists of the position pi
yi
k, vi
k = [pi
k ∈ Rd of agent i. For example, if the state si
velocity vi
k

k ∈ S ⊂ Rn, and let ai

k, y2

(cid:44) [y1

k and the velocity vi

comprises the position pi
k and some
j (cid:54)= i observes only
other information, then another agent
the output of the agent i, i.e., the position and the velocity.
Given M total agents, for agent i, it could observe output of
all other agents: y−i
k

k, . . . , yi−1

Each agent has a goal state ˜si, which is the state they would
like to reach. It is assumed that each agent knows its own
state and goal state, and observe output of other agents. All
the information agent i has at time k could be represented
as observation, øi
k ]. Given the observation, we
k
would like to compute a control policy π that maps the
observation øi
k to its action ai
k for all robots. We parameterize
the policy using variable θ ∈ Rn, that is

, . . . , yM
k ].

k, ˜si, y−i

, yi+1
k

(cid:44) [si

k

k = π(øi
ai

k, θ ) ∈ A

(2)

Given the policy π(·, θ ), each agent should reach their
goal state in the shortest time while avoiding collision with
each other. Then the collision avoidance problem could
be formulated as a multi-agent sequential decision making
problem, given by

γ kR(øi
k)

M
∞
1
∑
∑
min
M
θ
i=1
k=0
k+1 = f (si
s.t. si
k = π(øi
ai
k − p j
(cid:107)pi
si
0 = si

k) ∀i = 1, . . . , M, ∀k ∈ N

k, ai
k, θ ) ∈ A
(3c)
k(cid:107) > 2r, ∀i, j = 1, . . . , M, i (cid:54)= j, ∀k ∈ N (3d)
initial, ∀i = 1, . . . , M,
(3e)

(3b)

(3a)

where R(·) is a scalar reward function, and γ ∈ (0, 1] is the
discount factor. The reward function R(·) awards the robot
for approaching the goal state and penalizes for collisions
with other agents, it will be further explained in Section III-
A. Equation (3b) are due to nonlinear dynamics, equa-
tion (3c) means that all agents should follow the same policy,
and inequalities (3d) encode collision avoidance conditions.
It is assumed that each agent could be approximated as a disc
with the same radius r. Each agent i has a given initial state
si
initial, which is expressed as the equality constraint (3e).
It is rather challenging to directly solve (3) in a centralized
way. The optimization is highly non-convex due to nonlinear
equality constraints (3b) and non-convex inequality con-
straints (3d). Besides, each agent only has partial information
of surrounding agents. Instead of solving (3) directly, we
handle the problem by ﬁrst solving a two agents collision
avoidance problem via RL, and then transfer the multi-
agent collision avoidance problem into a simple convex
optimization problem with safety constraints from ORCA.

III. APPROACH

This section presents an algorithm to solve the multi-
agent collision avoidance problem (3) which combines RL
and ORCA. To reduce online computation and make the
training fast, we ﬁrst solve a two agents collision avoidance
problem using deep RL. Many exising RL-based collision
avoidance algorithms assume that agents can directly control
their velocities and require discretization of the action space.

is a positive reward. The second term (rp)i
award the agent approaching the goal state.

k is designed to

(rp)i

k = −

k+1 − ˜si||
||si
||si
0 − ˜si||

.

(6)

As the agent gets closer to the goal state, the reward becomes
larger. The last term (rc)i
k is designed to penalize collisions
with other agents,

(rc)i

k =

(cid:40)

rcollision
0

k+1 − p j

if ||pi
otherwise

k+1|| < 2r, ∀ j (cid:54)= i

,

(7)

where rcollision is a negative penalty for collisions.

Training Process: Since all agents are homogeneous, it is
natural to assume that both agents follow the same policy.
Therefore, when updating the neural network, the difference
of parameters dθ comes from the observation, action and
reward trajectories of both agents. This is different from
standard RL, which assumes there exists only one decision
maker. This modiﬁcation could be applied to nearly any deep
RL framework. In our experiment, we use Evolution Strategy
(ES) as our training method.

B. Multi-agent Collision Avoidance with Improved Safety

For multi-agent collision avoidance problem, each agent
has more than one neighbor agent. Given the trained policy
from two agents collision avoidance problem, each nearby
agent would introduce an action for collision avoidance. To
avoid collisions in multi-agent problems, multiple actions
are combined into one action. Then we introduce linear
safety constraints from the ORCA and handle the multi-agent
collision avoidance problem by solving a simple convex
optimization.

Action Combination: For one agent i, each neighbor agent
j results in an action from the trained policy, ai, j
k , θ ),
k
j (cid:54)= i and i, j = 1, . . . , M. Intuitively, the actions introduced
by closer neighbors and approaching neighbors are more
important. Therefore, we combine all actions with distance
and velocity-based weights:

(cid:44) π(øi, j

.

=

(8)

∑M

wi, j =

ai,comb
k

j=1, j(cid:54)=i wi, jai, j
k
∑M
j=1, j(cid:54)=i wi, j
e−αDi, j
Di, j
Here wi, j represents the weight determined by the pseudo-
distance Di, j, and α is a scaling parameter. Our design of
weight wi, j
is inspired by the artiﬁcial potential function
proposed by [18]. The weight wi, j becomes inﬁnite when
Di, j = 0. The pseudo-distance Di, j
is determined by the
relative position of agent j to agent i and velocity of agent j.
If agent i is behind the neighbor agent j, Di, j is the Euclidean
distance, otherwise it is deﬁned as adjusted distance that
scaled along the velocity of agent j:

(9)




||p j,i||
(cid:114)

Di, j =


γ j = e−β ||v j||.

||p j,i×v j||2+||γ j·(p j,i)T v j||2
||v j||2

if (p j,i)T v j < 0

if (p j,i)T v j ≥ 0

(10)

(11)

Fig. 1: The Algorithm Framework

Thus, they are only applicable to simple dynamics and can
lead to unnatural trajectories. Different from those studies,
we formulate RL with continuous action space for general
nonlinear agents. Our RL-based approach is faster than
other RL-based algorithms with a lightweight policy neural
network. Given the trained policy, we apply it to multi-
agent problems by combing pairwise actions introduced
by different nearby agents. To avoid collisions, ORCA is
introduced and we selects action by solving a simple convex
optimization problem with linear safety constraints. The
framework of our algorithm is shown in Fig. 1.

A. Two Agents Collision Avoidance via Reinforcement
Learning

Network Structure: For general policy-based RL algo-
rithm, the policy is usually represented as a neural network,
with the state as input and the action or parameters of the
action as output. For the two agents collision avoidance
problem with agents i and j, both of them have their
observations. With slight abuse of notation, we denote the
observations of agent i and j by øi, j
k , respectively.
State space in standard RL is now the observation space.
We use a deterministic policy, where the input of the neural
network is the observation and output is the action, that is
k = π(øi, j
ai, j
k , θ ). Here we use π(·, ·) to denote the policy
neural network and θ to denote parameters of the network.
Since there are only two agents, the input dimension of the
neural network is relatively small and the training can be
done efﬁciently.

k and ø j,i

Reward Design: The objective for each agent is to achieve
the goal state in the shortest time while avoiding collision
with each other. The reward function is designed as follows:

R(øi

k) = (rg)i

k + (rp)i

k + (rc)i
k

(4)

For agent i at time k, the reward function is designed as
the sum of three terms. The ﬁrst term (rg)i
k is designed to
encourage the agent for reaching the goal state,

(rg)i

k =

(cid:40)

rarrival
0

k+1 − ˜si|| < darrival

if ||si
otherwise

,

(5)

where darrival represents a small, positive threshold to deter-
mine whether agent i has reached the goal state ˜si, and rarrival

Here p j,i represents the relative position of agent j to i, and
γ j represents the scaling factor that deﬁned by parameter β
and v j, i.e. the velocity of agent j. Such a design of weights
makes agent i to give priority to agent j that is approaching,
and the weight increases as agent j speeds up. This weighted
combination approach is consistent with human intuition.
As human drivers, we would pay more attention to cars in
the vicinity and approaching. Given the combined action,
it is possible that the agent i would collide with nearby
agents in complex multi-agent cases. To guarantee safety, we
introduce the well-known ORCA constraints and address the
multi-agent collision avoidance problem by solving a simple
convex optimization.

A Brief Review of ORCA: Before introducing the convex
optimization, we brieﬂy review some key concepts in the
optimal reciprocal collision avoidance (ORCA) algorithm.
The ORCA algorithm is a distributed collision avoidance
algorithm for continuous time system with single integrators
dynamics. Similarly to our assumption, ORCA assumes that
each robot could be approximated by a disc with different
radius ri. Each agent takes action independently by observing
the velocities vi(t), positions pi(t) and radius ri of other
agents. Since ORCA is designed for agents with continuous
time domain, with a little abuse of notation, here we use
vi(t) and pi(t) to represent velocity and position of agent i
at continuous time t. We ﬁrst consider a two agents collision
avoidance problem with a continuous time horizon T . For
two agents i and j at time t, ORCA returns a pair of linear
constraints for velocities of the two agents independently:

(cid:40)

(ai, j)T vi(t + τ) + bi, j ≥ 0 τ ∈ [0, T ]
(a j,i)T v j(t + τ) + b j,i ≥ 0 τ ∈ [0, T ]

.

(12)

Here ai, j, a j,i ∈ Rd and bi, j, b j,i ∈ R are determined by the
current positions pi(t), p j(t), velocities vi(t), v j(t) and radius
ri, r j, which are known to both agents. If both constraints are
satisﬁed, there would be no collision between agents i and j
within time horizon T . When ORCA is extended to the multi-
agent problem, there would be multiple linear constraints for
each agent i,

Aivi(t + τ) + bi ≥ 0, τ ∈ [0, T ],

(13)

where Ai ∈ RK×d and bi ∈ RK, K is the number of nearby
agents to be considered. Note that K may be smaller than
M − 1, which means we do not need to consider all moving
agents for collision avoidance of agent i. Given the maximal
velocity v j,max of agent
j, if distance of agent i and j is
greater than (vi,max + v j,max)T , they would not collide within
time horizon T . With properly selected K, inequality (13)
provides a safety guarantee of each agent i in velocity space.
Convex Optimization with Safety Constraints: To avoid
collisions for general nonlinear agents, we introduce the
ORCA constraints (13) and transform them from velocity
space to action space. Different from ORCA, our approach
is designed for discrete time systems. We ﬁrst adapt (13) for
discrete time systems by letting T (cid:44) N(cid:52)t and t (cid:44) k(cid:52)t. Here
N is a positive integer representing discrete time horizon, and

k is a non-negative integer corresponding to current time t,
and (cid:52)t is the discretization time step. The ORCA constraints
could be written as
Aivi

(14)
In practice, we update Ai ∈ RK×d and bi ∈ RK that deﬁnes
the ORCA constraints (14) at each time step, thus it sufﬁces
to choose d = 1, leading to
Aivi

k+d + bi ≥ 0, d = 1, . . . , N.

k+1 + bi ≥ 0.

(15)

Here Ai and bi is determined by positions, velocities (and
shared radius r) of agent i and the closet K neighbor agents
at time k. Safety is guaranteed if (15) holds at each time
step. To control the agent i for collision avoidance, we need
to change the linear constraints from velocity space to action
space. We assume the relationship between current action ai
k
and velocity at next time step vi
k+1 is linear or could be
approximated by a linear mapping. For a general nonlinear
system, we could linearize the system around the current
state and last action. This relationship is approximated by
k+1 ≈ Avai
vi

k + bv.

(16)

By combing (15) and (16), we could obtain a safety con-
straints for the action ai
k,
Ai(Avai

k + bv) + bi ≥ 0.

(17)

k and the velocity vi

If inequality (17) holds at each time step and the relationship
between action ai
k+1 is exactly linear, it is
strictly guaranteed that the agent i would never collide with
any other agents [3]. Rigorously speaking, the linearization
for nonlinear system can introduce small errors. However, in
practice this can be worked around by slightly enlarging the
radius r in our approach.

The combined action from RL (8) provides preferred
action that would drive the robot to reach the goal state, and
the linear constraints from (17) provides safety constraints
for the agent. To reach the goal while avoiding collisions,
agent i selects the action that is the closest to ai,comb
while
satisfying safety constraints (17) and physical constraints:
k = argmina ||a − ai,comb
ai
||2
s.t. Ai(Ava + bv) + bi ≥ 0

(18b)

(18a)

k

k

a ∈ A .

(18c)

Here (18a) is a quadratic cost function, (18b) are linear
safety constraints from ORCA, and (18c) is the convex
physical constraints. The optimization problem (18) is a
simple convex optimization and can be solved efﬁciently.

To sum up, given the trained policy π(·, θ ) from the two
agents collision avoidance problem, we propose a decentral-
ized multi-agent collision avoidance algorithm by solving
a simple convex optimization with safety constraints from
ORCA. If the relationship between action and velocity is
linear, the safety constraints provide strict safety guarantee.
The overall approach is summarized in Algorithm 1. In the
next section, we demonstrate our algorithm via different
challenging experiments.

Algorithm 1 Reciprocal Collision Avoidance for General
Nonlinear Agents using Reinforcement Learning

1: Input: The trained policy π(·, θ ) from the two agents
initial, and

collision avoidance problem, the initial state si
the goal state of each agent ˜si, i = 1, . . . , M

initial, k ← 0

for i = 1, . . . , M do

for j = 1, . . . , M and j (cid:54)= i do

2: Initialization: si
0 ← si
3: while not all agents reach goal states do
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:

k ← π(øi, j
ai, j
end for
Combine actions, ai,comb
Select action ai
Apply ai

k , θ )

k to agent i

k

via (8)
k by solving optimization (18)

9:
10:
11:
12:
13: end while

end for
k ← k + 1

IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

We illustrate the performance of our proposed method

through several multi-agent interactive scenarios.

A. Simulation Setup

Throughout this section, we adopt the nonlinear kinematic
bicycle model [19] operating in a two-dimensional Euclidean
space. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the dynamics is deﬁned as

˙x = v cos(ψ + β )
˙y = v sin(ψ + β )

sin(β )

˙ψ =

v
lr
˙v = a

β = tan−1

(cid:18) lr

l f + lr

(cid:19)

tan δ f

(19a)

(19b)

(19c)

(19d)

(19e)

where x, y are the coordinates of the centroid, ψ is the inertial
heading, v is the speed of vehicle, β is angle of velocity with
respect to longitudinal axis of the car, l f and lr represents
the distance from the centroid to the front and rear axles.
Actions consist of front steering angle δ f and acceleration
a.

Fig. 2: Kinematic Bicycle Model

Fig. 3: Trajectories of three, four and eight agents

Unlike other RL-based approaches [12]–[16] that assume
that velocity of each agent could be directly controlled, our
approach is directly applicable to the above nonlinear model
with acceleration a and steering angle δ f as control. As far
as we know, this is the ﬁrst RL-based multi-agent collision
avoidance algorithm that directly works for kinematic bicycle
model. As for ORCA-based approach, [9] is designed for
bicycle model by ﬁxing a tracking controller and transferring
the control to velocity space. But like many other ORCA-
based approaches, it requires a high-level planning module
to provide preferred velocity, which would greatly inﬂuence
the performance.

To reduce redundancy and simplify training, we use a local
coordinate for each agent with x axis pointing towards the
inertial heading of the vehicle in simulation. The observation
of agent i at time k is represented by concatenating the
goal position, velocity of agent i, positions and velocities
of nearby agents in the local coordinate. The dynamics (19)
is discretized in time and all simulations operate with dis-
cretization time step of 0.05 s (20 Hz).

B. Policy Training with RL

The policy for two-agent collision avoidance is trained
following the described procedure in Section III-A. We use
a two-layer neural network with 16 neurons at each layer.
The network takes the observation of size 8 and predicts
the control action of size 2. Compared with other RL-based
approach, this is a signiﬁcantly lightweight design of network
architecture with a total of only 450 training parameters.
the
On an eight-core i7-7700K CPU 4.20GHz machine,
empirically optimal policy is obtained within 20 minutes of
wall-clock time training. The policy is then combined with
the ORCA constraints to handle multi-agent interactions. It is
worth noting that all simulation results in IV-C comes from
the same trained policy.

C. Simulation Results

As shown in Fig. 3, we ﬁrst test the proposed method
in simple scenarios with up to eight agents. The trajectory
of each agent is represented by circles with the same color,
and the color gradually fades as the agent moves. The goal
position of each agent is symmetric with the initial position
about the origin. It is worth emphasizing that the three-
agent interactive scene is inspired by a well-know deadlock
scenario of the classic ORCA method [11]. The symmetric
setup of scenarios with four and eight agents are also easy
to result in conﬂicts of actions. Surprisingly, our proposed

Fig. 4: Trajectories of 42 agents. The left ﬁgure: the initial
position of each agent, different agents are marked by dots
with different color. The middle ﬁgure: the trajectory in the
middle of the process. The right ﬁgure: complete trajectories.

(a) Positions, trajectory, actions when t = 6.95 s

Fig. 5: Trajectories of 20 agents. The left ﬁgure: the initial
position of each agent is denoted by solid circle with different
colors. The middle ﬁgure: the trajectory in the middle of the
process. The right ﬁgure: complete trajectories.

approach successfully generates a set of smooth trajectories
reaching the target position for all the three scenarios without
encountering any collision, congestion or deadlock.

We now demonstrate our approach with a more complex
task. As shown in Fig. 4, we have 42 agents evenly dis-
tributed on a circle, with initial velocities pointing to the
adjacent neighbor of each agent clockwise. The goal position
of each agent is symmetric with the initial position about
the origin. Trajectories of different agents are marked by
different colors. It is clear from the ﬁgure that a set of
safe and smooth trajectories are generated with each agent
ﬁrst turning right to have the heading more aligned with the
target position, then passing the origin from the left side with
ORCA-constrained actions for collision avoidance.

The next example is to demonstrate the capability of the
proposed method in a customized task that requires more
sophisticated interactions with surrounding agents. As shown
in Fig. 5, initial positions are marked in the left ﬁgure as
dots with different colors. We have 20 agents that are evenly
distributed on two co-centric circles. For agents located on
the large circle, the goal positions are located on the small
circle that aligns with the start position through the center,
and vice versa. Such a task is more difﬁcult than previous
ones. In order to reach the goal position, each agent is
expected to have conﬂicts with agents initialized from both
circles. However, as shown in Fig. 5, trajectories generated
by our approach is smooth and safe.

Furthermore, recall the discussion in Section III-B where
the combination of actions from trained policy could also
drive the controlled agent to the unsafe state. From Fig. 6,
we select one agent and further illustrates how the ORCA

(b) Positions, trajectory, actions when t = 7.45 s

Fig. 6: Illustration of the importance of ORCA constraints
through a 24 agents example. The left column shows po-
sitions of all agents and trajectories of agent 1. The right
column shows combined actions and selected actions of
agent 1.

constraints alter the selected actions to enhance safety. As
shown in Fig. (6a), when t = 6.95 s, the combined action of
agent 1 would drive the robot forward to its left. However,
this would cause a collision with the robot (marked by
dark blue) to its front left. To avoid collision, the ORCA
constraints revise the robot to a right turn with deceleration.
We can observe an obvious twist
to the right from the
position trajectory in the left ﬁgure of Fig.(6b), which is
marked by a black arrow. The example clearly indicates
the importance of having ORCA constraints in the proposed
approach to avoid collisions.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a decentralized collision avoid-
ance algorithm for general nonlinear systems by combing
the RL and ORCA. The proposed method consists of two
stages: ﬁrst train a two-agent collision avoidance policy using
RL; then compute the overall multi-agent collision avoidance
action by properly combining multiple avoidance actions
while respecting safety constraints induced by ORCA. The
overall training process is much faster than other RL-based
collision avoidance algorithms. The introduction of ORCA
signiﬁcantly improves system safety. We demonstrate the
proposed method through several collision avoidance prob-
lems with kinematic bicycle agent models. In the future, we
would like to apply the proposed approach to systems with
more complex dynamics which has larger state space.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Sanchez and J.-C. Latombe, “Using a prm planner to compare
centralized and decoupled planning for multi-robot systems,” in
Proceedings 2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (Cat. No. 02CH37292), vol. 2.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 2112–
2119.

ˇSvestka and M. H. Overmars, “Coordinated path planning for
multiple robots,” Robotics and autonomous systems, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 125–152, 1998.

[2] P.

[3] J. Van Den Berg, S. J. Guy, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal
Springer, 2011,

n-body collision avoidance,” in Robotics research.
pp. 3–19.

[4] J. Van den Berg, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal velocity obsta-
cles for real-time multi-agent navigation,” in 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1928–1935.
[5] P. Fiorini and Z. Shiller, “Motion planning in dynamic environments
using velocity obstacles,” The International Journal of Robotics Re-
search, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 760–772, 1998.

[6] J. Van Den Berg, J. Snape, S. J. Guy, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal
collision avoidance with acceleration-velocity obstacles,” in 2011
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 3475–3482.

[7] M. Ruﬂi, J. Alonso-Mora, and R. Siegwart, “Reciprocal collision
avoidance with motion continuity constraints,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 899–912, 2013.

[8] J. Alonso-Mora, A. Breitenmoser, M. Ruﬂi, P. Beardsley, and
R. Siegwart, “Optimal reciprocal collision avoidance for multiple
non-holonomic robots,” in Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems.
Springer, 2013, pp. 203–216.

[9] J. Alonso-Mora, A. Breitenmoser, P. Beardsley, and R. Siegwart,
“Reciprocal collision avoidance for multiple car-like robots,” in 2012
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE,
2012, pp. 360–366.

[10] D. Bareiss and J. van den Berg, “Generalized reciprocal collision
avoidance,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 34,
no. 12, pp. 1501–1514, 2015.

[11] J. Godoy, T. Chen, S. J. Guy, I. Karamouzas, and M. Gini, “ALAN:
Adaptive learning for multi-agent navigation,” Autonomous Robots,
vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1543–1562, 2018.

[12] Y. F. Chen, M. Liu, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “Decentralized non-
communicating multiagent collision avoidance with deep reinforce-
ment learning,” in 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation (ICRA).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 285–292.

[13] Y. F. Chen, M. Everett, M. Liu, and J. P. How, “Socially aware
motion planning with deep reinforcement learning,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1343–1350.

[14] M. Everett, Y. F. Chen, and J. P. How, “Motion planning among
dynamic, decision-making agents with deep reinforcement learning,”
in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 3052–3059.
[15] T. Fan, P. Long, W. Liu, and J. Pan, “Fully distributed multi-robot col-
lision avoidance via deep reinforcement learning for safe and efﬁcient
navigation in complex scenarios,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.03841,
2018.

[16] P. Long, T. Fanl, X. Liao, W. Liu, H. Zhang, and J. Pan, “Towards
optimally decentralized multi-robot collision avoidance via deep re-
learning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
inforcement
Robotics and Automation (ICRA).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 6252–6259.

[17] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforce-
ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.

[18] M. T. Wolf and J. W. Burdick, “Artiﬁcial potential functions for
highway driving with collision avoidance,” in 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2008, pp. 3731–3736.
Springer Science &

[19] R. Rajamani, Vehicle dynamics and control.

Business Media, 2011.

