3
2
0
2

g
u
A
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
8
7
1
1
.
8
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Building Better Human-Agent Teams: Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness
in Voice

SAMUEL WESTBY, Northeastern University, USA
RICHARD J. RADKE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
CHRISTOPH RIEDL, Northeastern University, USA
BROOKE FOUCAULT WELLES, Northeastern University, USA

We manipulate the helpfulness and voice type of a voice-only agent teammate to examine subjective and objective outcomes in twenty

teams with one agent and at least three humans during a problem solving task. Our results show that agent helpfulness, but not the

humanness of the agent’s voice, significantly alters perceptions of agent intelligence and trust in agent teammates, as well as affects

team performance. Additionally, we find that the humanness of an agent’s voice negatively interacts with agent helpfulness to flip its

effect on perceived anthropomorphism and perceived animacy. This means human teammates interpret the agent’s contributions

differently depending on its vocal type. These findings suggest that function matters more than form when designing agents for

effective human-agent teams and help to explain contradictory findings in the literature. Practitioners should be aware of the interactive

effects of voice and helpfulness on subjective outcomes such as perceived anthropomorphism and animacy.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing; Empirical studies

in HCI.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: human-agent teams, anthropomorphism, team performance, virtual agents

ACM Reference Format:

Samuel Westby, Richard J. Radke, Christoph Riedl, and Brooke Foucault Welles. 2023. Building Better Human-Agent Teams: Tradeoffs

in Helpfulness and Humanness in Voice. 1, 1 (August 2023), 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION

Voice agents have become an essential part of our daily lives. They help us select songs to play in the car, maintain our

shopping list, and search for information in real-time. These agents have also made their way into more complicated

settings such as mental health treatment [4] and improving collective intelligence [40]. For future applications of agents

supporting groups of humans, we must understand the fundamental components of human-agent teamwork to leverage

the full potential of this technology. While research on teamwork has provided valuable insights into the components

of human-human team dynamics, the agent in human-agent teams (HATs) adds complexity and new challenges. This

study seeks to answer how two factors influence the dynamics between human teams and voice agents: the helpfulness

and humanness of the agent. Understanding this issue will enable better design and implementation of voice agents in

team settings across multiple domains.

Authors’ addresses: Samuel Westby, westby.s@northeastern.edu, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA, 02115; Richard J. Radke, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, 12180; Christoph Riedl, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA, 02115; Brooke Foucault Welles, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA, USA, 02115.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Manuscript submitted to ACM

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Westby, et al.

We conducted a team experiment using a 2 × 2 between-subjects design with random treatment assignment. Twenty
teams of three or four people collaborated using an online video conferencing software to complete a puzzle solving

task. We added a voice-only agent participant to the meeting and recorded each participant’s audio and video. We

used a post-experiment questionnaire to measure perceptions of the agent. Our results uncover second-order effects

between the helpfulness and humanness of agent teammates. This clarifies contradictory findings in studies that only

manipulated the helpfulness of an agent teammate [27, 35, 36].

We found that the voice of our agent (human or robotic) negatively interacts with its helpfulness to flip its effect on

perceived humanness (animacy and anthropomorphism). A human-sounding agent making unhelpful contributions is

perceived as more human than when it makes helpful contributions. The converse is true for a robotic-sounding agent.

Computers Are Social Actors (CASA) [28] and similar frameworks provide a clear explanation for this. Participants

create expectations for how the agent should act and sound, and violations of those expectations decrease perceived

humanness. Notably, the agent’s voice did not affect perceived trustworthiness or intelligence. This may be because

participants were given enough time with the agent to make objective judgements. They were able to distinguish helpful

from unhelpful agents, despite how the agent sounded. Helpfulness of the agent significantly affected performance at

the three-quarter mark, but was insignificant at the end of the task (vocal type was insignificant for both time points).

Perhaps learning that an agent teammate was unhelpful allowed teams to progress through the puzzle while ignoring

its bad advice.

We make the following contributions:

• We offer novel insights to a literature that has suffered from conflicting findings. The effects of agent helpfulness
on subjective and objective outcomes are inconsistent and difficult to generalize. We contextualize these effects

by introducing a second variable, the humanness of the agent.

• We show that the perceived humanness of our artificial teammate is subject to a negative interactive effect

between the content our agent shares and the sound of its voice.

• We affirm that our helpful agent improves performance more than our unhelpful agent.
• We uncover an effect of agent helpfulness on perceived trustworthiness and intelligence. This is independent of

whether the agent’s voice sounds robotic or human.

2 BACKGROUND

The developing relationships between humans and technology allow us to augment human-human teams. Scientists

have investigated this issue for decades [5, 25], and each advancement in technology invites new opportunities to

improve human cooperation. Despite the extensive literature on human-human teams, technologically-augmented

teams show novel behavior that is not a direct extension of their non-augmented counterparts [29, 30]. In this paper,

we limit “technologically-augmented teams” to situations with at least one human working cooperatively with at least

one voice-only autonomous agent [26]. All of our teams in our study involve three or four humans working with one

agent. Through different lenses, this agent could be an algorithm [22], autonomy [9], or AI [2]. We recognize nuance in

each sub-definition and use the term “agent”.

Designing an effective HAT (a team that is more effective than a human-only team) requires understanding both team

success and human-agent interaction. An important factor that changes a team’s receptivity to their agent teammate is

trust [9]. A team must give the agent an appropriate amount of trust in order to be effective. Over-trusting a flawed

agent or under-trusting a flawless agent will both lead to worse outcomes than having no agent teammate at all

Manuscript submitted to ACM

Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

3

[18, 33]. The team must calibrate their trust to find a stable point that aligns with the agent’s ability [12, 24]. Work

on trust in automation such as auto-pilot systems or factory machines shows that humans form their initial trust

based on judgements of subjective variables such as context or appearance [24]. After interacting with the automation,

trust becomes more objective and ability-based [13, 24]. Recent studies show a positive correlation between trust and

perceived humanness of agents in HATs [37], but more work is needed to understand the calibration of a human team’s

trust in agents over time.

More generally, the Computers Are Social Actors (CASA) paradigm states that human perceptions of agent teammates

come from social scripts and behavioral expectations [17, 28]. We have expections for each interaction ranging from

logging into a website, interacting with Siri, or talking to a friend. Semi-intelligent actors like Siri are less than human

but more than objects, which creates ambiguity for how we should interact with them. Which heuristics apply? Which

traits matter? To answer these questions, an ontological category is forming for these semi-human actors [20]. Even

this new category is a moving target [15]. What is “human” appears to be shrinking, and the space between human and

object appears to be growing. For actors that fit in this growing category, we must understand how different attributes

affect their interactions with humans.

3 THEORY DEVELOPMENT

3.1 Agent Humanness

The form of agent teammates can transform the relationship between agent and person. Changing how human-like an

agent appears or sounds can alter how much humans prefer an agent [10, 34, 35] or trust an agent [8, 10, 19, 32, 37].

It can also have no effect on perceived trustworthiness [7]. Depending on the task and environment, altering the

humanness of an agent can lead to negative outcomes such as reduced task focus, less efficient communication, and

lower task performance [6, 29].

Two common measures of perceived humanness are anthropomorphism and animacy. Anthropomorphism captures

the attribution of human traits to non-human entities [14]. To measure this, questionnaires ask for comparisons such as

fake vs. natural or unconscious vs. conscious [3]. Animacy is the perception of acting on one’s own accord [3]. Is the

agent mechanical or organic? Is the agent apathetic or responsive? This is similar to the concept of agency, which is

one’s right to act on one’s will [38].

Both perceived anthropomorphism and perceived animacy may correlate with the form of the agent teammate,

but neither are solely dependent on form. Designers and researchers should take caution to not conflate the two. An

agent that acts more human may not be perceived as such. In this paper, agent humanness refers to the characteristics

of the agent, while perceived humanness involves subjective judgements by humans about the humanness of the

agent. These subjective judgements depend on many factors that can interact and trigger different outcomes. This can

alter perceptions of humanness and shift the human-agent dynamic [17]. Some factors include the specific goals and

characteristics of the team and task, individual preferences and expectations of team members [30], and the helpfulness

of the agent teammate.

Building upon these findings, we now present a set of hypotheses aimed at understanding the influence of vocal

humanness on perceived trustworthiness, perceived intelligence, and perceived humanness of the agent teammate:

H1a: Vocal type of the agent will affect perceived trustworthiness. Participants will perceive the agent with a human

voice as more trustworthy than the agent with a robotic voice.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

4

Westby, et al.

H1b: Vocal type of the agent will affect perceived intelligence. Participants will perceive the agent with a human voice

as more intelligent than the agent with a robotic voice

H1c: Vocal type of the agent will affect perceived humanness. Participants will perceive the agent with a human voice

as more human than the agent with a robotic voice.

3.2 Agent Helpfulness

If an agent is not useful to the team, then it is a distraction or a hindrance. Its benefits must outweigh the additional

cognitive load it adds to the team [16, 17, 31]. With technology deployed in real-world teams, it is inevitable that the

complexity of human interaction will result in the technology executing faulty or unhelpful actions. How do these errors

affect perceptions of the agent and outcomes of the team? It seems obvious that an error-free agent should improve

team performance more than an error-prone agent. This is sometimes true [35, 36], but not always. Participants may

like error-prone agents more and thus be more receptive to their suggestions [21]. Measures of perceived intelligence

[3] and perceived trustworthiness [32] are designed to report on perceptions of ability. A helpful agent, regardless of

voice or form, should be perceived as intelligent and trustworthy. Form may cause temporary subjective differences,

but users should be able to assess an agent’s true helpfulness.

Considering the importance of agent helpfulness in shaping team dynamics and outcomes, we now propose a set of

hypotheses to examine the relationship between agent helpfulness and team performance, as well as perceptions of

intelligence and trustworthiness:

H2a: Teams with a helpful agent will perform better than teams with an unhelpful agent.

H2b: Helpful agents will be perceived as more intelligent than unhelpful agents.

H2c: Helpful agents will be perceived as more trustworthy than unhelpful agents.

3.3 Helpfulness Combined With Humanness

The helpfulness of an agent partner may interact with its form to change objective and subjective outcomes in HATs.

One study found that humans learned better from a human voice than a robotic voice [1]. They posit that students in

the human voice condition were willing to put more effort into the interaction because they liked the human agent

more. Similarly, a human-like agent may cause users to be more forgiving of its errors than a non-human-like agent [11].

Because trust is dynamic, it can be less or more resilient depending on task, environment, or person [12, 13]. In [23], the

humanness and advice quality (helpfulness) of a virtual agent were manipulated in a web-based single-player puzzle

game. The results show that agent helpfulness, rather than agent humanness, had a positive effect on behavioral trust.

It may be the case that humanness can magnify the effects of advice quality. Unhelpful agents that are also human may

have a harsher impact on performance than unhelpful agents with a robotic voice because humans are more lenient

with the human-voiced agent’s errors and care more about its contributions.

In [35], researchers used a Wizard of Oz technique to give tasks to participants through a robot teammate. This robot

had three versions: neutral, flawless, and flawed. Neutral had no gestures, flawless had congruent co-verbal gestures,

and flawed had incongruent gestures. The instructions and voice remained the same across all three conditions, but the

manipulation of gestures affected subjective and objective outcomes. Participants in the flawed condition performed

worse than the other two conditions, but rated their robot partner highest in anthropomorphism. In a similarly designed

study, researchers again used Wizard of Oz techniques and a robot to ask participants a set of questions and requests

[36]. These questions started as benign as, "Would you like to listen to some music?" with the options, "Yes, Rock",

Manuscript submitted to ACM

Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

5

"Yes, Classical", and "No, thanks." In the flawless condition, the robot would obey the participant’s choice. In the flawed

condition, the robot would take an action different from the participant’s choice. Next, the robot asked participants

a series of unusual requests such as, "pour orange juice into the plant on the windowsill". Contrary to [35], robots

with faulty behavior were rated lowest in perceived anthropomorphism, while treatment had no effect on participants’

behavioral trust in the agent. To further complicate the effect of flawed or flawless actions on HATs, another study found

no evidence that manipulating agent functionality alters perceived anthropomorphism or perceived intelligence of agent

teammates [27]. The incongruent results of these three studies suggest that additional variables such as environment

or form may moderate the effect of agent helpfulness on HAT outcomes. Additionally, differences in combinations

of movement and voice can lead to altered perceptions of humanness [39]. This motivates our isolation of only one

modality, voice.

We now propose the following hypotheses to examine the combined influence of vocal type and helpfulness on team

performance and perceptions of humanness:

H3a: Vocal type will magnify the effects of helpfulness/unhelpfulness. Teams with a human-voiced unhelpful agent

will perform worse than any other team. Teams with a human-voiced helpful agent will perform the best.

H3b: There will be an interaction between vocal type and helpfulness to affect perceptions of humanness.

Our results offer a new perspective on the complex relationship between humans and technology and can guide the

design for effective human-agent teaming systems of the future.

4 METHODOLOGY

We conducted an IRB-approved experimental study with a 2 × 2 between-subjects design and random treatment
assignment. We manipulated an audio-only agent teammate’s contribution quality and vocal humanness. During the

experiment, teams of three or four people collaborated to solve a puzzle task using online video conferencing software

and an automated agent helper. Upon completion, they completed a post-experiment questionnaire and were paid

$20/hour in Amazon gift cards for 60-90 minutes of their time.

4.1 Participants

69 people from the Northeast United States participated in this study. They were divided into 20 teams of three or four
people, five teams for each treatment. Participant ages ranged from 18 to 34 (mean 21.7 ± 3.67, Table 1). Team size was
based on convenience. Four participants were scheduled for each session, and if three or more attended then the session

continued. For one session only one participant attended, and they were given the option to receive payment or be

placed in a future team.

4.2 The Agent

The “AI Puzzle Master” communicated to participants through audio alone and displayed a black screen with its name in

the online video conferencing software. Although it would not respond to participant communication, an experimenter

read a script to introduce the Puzzle Master as an AI assistant that could offer new perspectives and information.

The Puzzle Master gave six clues over 40 minutes to guide participants toward different milestones in the puzzle. We

standardized each clue and gave them in the same order at the same time for every team.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

6

Westby, et al.

Table 1. Participant demographics in each of the four agent treatments: human-helpful (HH), human-unhelpful (HU), robotic-helpful
(RH), and robotic-unhelpful (RU). English fluency is self-reported as Native Proficiency (NP), Full Proficiency (FP), and Proficiency (P).
No participants reported a lower fluency.

Treatment

Participants

Female Teams Mean Age (SD) NP

FP

P

HH 17
HU 17
RH 18
RU 17

All

69

65%
47%
56%
71%

59%

5
5
5
5

22.2 (4.56)
21.9 (3.37)
20.9 (2.78)
21.8 (3.62)

65% 35% 0%
47% 53% 0%
67% 17% 17%
59% 41% 0%

20

21.7 (3.67)

59% 36% 4%

4.3 The Puzzle

Jay Lorch and Michelle Teague designed the Cursed Treasure Puzzle for the 2005 Microsoft Intern Puzzle Day (https:

//jaylorch.net/puzzles/CursedTreasure/). The puzzle involves a set of cursed treasure chests; players need to uncover

the meanings of each curse to determine a final secret word. For example, the octopus curse is present only if no gems

in a chest are touching, and absent if any gems are touching.(Figure 1). There are five curses to determine, and two

additional steps to decode the final word, resulting in seven milestones that each team can achieve during the time

allotted. This gives us a granular measure of team performance embedded into a complex and interesting task.

Fig. 1. A sample of three chests in the Cursed Treasure puzzle. Notice that the octopus curse relates to the separation of gems.

4.3.1 Experimental Manipulation. In a 2 × 2 design, we manipulated the agent’s clue content and voice. Its clues were
either helpful or unhelpful and its voice was either human or robotic. The helpful agent gave clues such as, “The

octopus rule relates to separation between the gems” (which is correct) while the unhelpful agent misled teams with

information such as, “The octopus rule has to do with the sizes of the gems” (which is incorrect). This was intended

to motivate teams to start looking for patterns within the octopus category. A female voice actor recorded the audio

for the human voice condition, and a text-to-speech program generated the audio for the robotic voice condition. The

robotic voice sounded female, but was clearly computer generated with non-human paralanguage.

4.3.2 Treatment Validation. We ran a pre-test validation to check if the robotic voice was perceived as non-human. We

recruited 400 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants listened to audio clips of our robotic agent’s

clues and then answered, "Is this voice a human or ___?” on a seven-point Likert scale of agreement from “Definitely

___” to “Definitely human”. There were eight groups of fifty participants each with a different word for the voice. We
compared the proportion of responses for“Definitely ___” and “Very likely ___” to an expected proportion of 2/7 using
a one-tailed Z-test. Participants were able to accurately label the voice as non-human, even when we manipulated
the word referring to the robotic voice. We used the following words: a machine (𝑧 = 3.111, 𝑝 = 0.002), a computer
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

7

(𝑧 = 3.677, 𝑝 < 0.001), a robot (𝑧 = 2.263, 𝑝 = 0.024), a digital assistant (𝑧 = 3.394, 𝑝 = 0.001), a virtual assistant
(𝑧 = 3.394, 𝑝 = 0.001), an automated assistant (𝑧 = 2.828, 𝑝 = 0.005), automation (𝑧 = 3.677, 𝑝 < 0.001), and artificial
intelligence (𝑧 = 2.546, 𝑝 = 0.011). This validation confirmed that the robotic voice was perceived as non-human. We
found no substantial difference between the specific labels (robot, computer, etc.).

4.4 Post-Test Questionnaire

At the conclusion of the puzzle, either after 40 minutes or when teams solved the puzzle (𝑛 = 3), participants completed
a questionnaire. The questionnaire consisted of five sections, two of which are used in this paper and described below.

4.4.1 The Godspeed Questionnaire. We used a subset of the Godspeed Questionnaire [3] to measure perceived an-

thropomorphism, perceived animacy, and perceived intelligence. Anthropomorphism is the attribution of human

characteristics to non-human entities [14], animacy is the perception of acting on one’s own accord [3], and perceived

intelligence is the evaluation of the agent’s intelligence [3]. Participants answered five questions per category using a

five-point semantic differential scale between opposing dyads. For example, “The Puzzle Master was Artificial verses

Lifelike), 1 - 5”.

4.4.2 Trustworthiness of the Puzzle Master. To measure trust in the Puzzle Master and perceptions of the Puzzle Master’s

contributions, we adapted a six-item questionnaire designed to measure trust in online avatars [32]. Participants rated

the following items on a five-point Likert scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree:

(1) I trusted the Puzzle Master’s clues.

(2) I was well informed by the Puzzle Master.

(3) The Puzzle Master gave helpful clues.

(4) The Puzzle Master was competent.

(5) The Puzzle Master was intentionally misleading the team.

(6) The Puzzle Master was useful in helping the team solve the puzzle.

Notice that item (5) is reverse coded. No participants failed this attention check.

5 RESULTS

Of the sixty-nine participants, all sixty-nine completed the experiment and questionnaire. For each questionnaire section,

we measured internal consistency using Cronbach’s Alpha and found that all sections were reliable (anthropomorphism
𝛼 = 0.79, animacy 𝛼 = 0.81, perceived intelligence 𝛼 = 0.84, and perceived trustworthiness 𝛼 = 0.93). We then used
regressions to determine the effects of our manipulations and interactions between helpfulness and humanness of

agents in HATs.

Regressions on questionnaire items. The questionnaire connects our manipulations of agent humanness and helpfulness

to subjective outcomes such as perceived humanness and trustworthiness. A multiple regression analysis with covariance

clustered by team was conducted using ordinary least squares (OLS) to fit a model for each questionnaire measure using

the following equation,

measure = 𝛽1 isHumanVoice + 𝛽2 isHelpfulClues + [𝛽3 isHumanVoice × isHelpfulClues] + 𝜖

(1)

where isHumanVoice and isHelpfulClues are binary {0, 1} variables depending on treatment assignment. isHumanVoice=0

indicates an agent with a robotic voice instead of with a human voice. isHelpfulClues=0 indicates an agent who gave

Manuscript submitted to ACM

8

Westby, et al.

unhelpful clues instead of helpful clues. Cluster-robust standard errors are used to account for clustering in standard

errors between independent teams.

Regressions on team performance. Team performance was measured as the number of milestones a team achieved (min.

1, max. 7). We calculated a multiple linear regression using OLS to predict team performance based on the treatment

category with the following equation,

Team Performance = 𝛽1 isHumanVoice + 𝛽2 isHelpfulClues + 𝜖

(2)

We tested adding an interaction term between isHumanVoice and isHelpfulClues, but removed it due to insignificance
(𝑝 = 0.713). Performances at two different time points were used. The first was the number of milestones achieved at
the three-quarter time point (thirty minutes), and the second was the number of milestones achieved at the final time

point (forty minutes).

Fig. 2. These three plots show the presence or absence of interactive effects caused by the helpfulness or humanness of the agent
for individual questionnaire responses. For both perceived anthropomorphism and animacy, the agent’s voice flips the effect of
helpfulness. In some cases, being helpful makes the agent seem more human, and in other cases it makes the agent seem less human.
Figure 2C shows that perceptions of agent intelligence were only significantly changed by the helpfulness of the agent teammate.

Fig. 3. This plots shows that agent humanness does not affect perceived trustworthiness. Agent helpfulness was the only factor that
caused differences in perceived trustworthiness (𝑝 < 0.001, Table 2 Model 4).

Manuscript submitted to ACM

HelpfulUnhelpful510152025Perceived AnthropomorphismHumanRobotHelpfulUnhelpful510152025Perceived AnimacyHelpfulUnhelpful510152025Perceived IntelligenceInteraction Plots for Godspeed Questionnaire ResponsesPuzzle Master HelpfulnessAverage Response Scorea)b)c)HelpfulUnhelpful102030Average Response ScorePerceived TrustworthinessHumanRobotTradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

9

Fig. 4. These plots show the effect of treatment categories on team performance. After 30 minutes which was 75% of the allotted time,
treatment significantly predicted 22.1% of the variance in team performance (𝑝 = 0.047, Table 2 Model 5). Only agent helpfulness
had a significant coefficient in the regression equation (𝑝 = 0.015, Table 2 Model 5) which means agent voice type did not affect
performance. After 40 minutes at the end of the task, there was no significant effect of treatment on performance (𝑝 = 0.247, Table 2
Model 6.)

Table 2. Results for multiple regressions of questionnaire items verses treatment with cluster-robust standard errors to account for
clustering in standard errors between independent teams following Equation 1. This table also includes results for multiple regressions
of team performance verses treatment following Equation 2.

Questionnaire Item
(Individual Level)

Performance
(Team Level)

Dependent Variable:

Helpful

Human

Helpful × Human

Adj. R2
Num. obs.

∗∗∗𝑝 < 0.001; ∗∗𝑝 < 0.01; ∗𝑝 < 0.05

Anthro
(1)

3.53**
(1.19)
2.53*
(1.19)
-4.88**
(1.67)

0.06
69

Animacy
(2)

3.95**
(1.14)
3.47*
(1.71)
-6.48**
(2.12)

0.08
69

Intell.
(3)

6.52***
(1.68)
2.41
(1.81)
-4.05
(2.29)

0.22
69

Trust
(4)

30 min.
(5)

40 min.
(6)

15.64***
(1.53)
1.94
(2.33)
-3.28
(2.78)

0.73
69

1.40*
(0.52)
-0.20
(0.52)

1.20
(0.70)
-0.20
(0.70)

0.22
20

0.05
20

5.1 Agent Humanness

The voice of the agent had no significant effect on perceived intelligence or perceived trustworthiness of the agent (intell.:
𝑝 = 0.183; trust: 𝑝 = 0.405), although the full regression predicted perceived intelligence (Adj. 𝑅2 = 0.219, 𝐹 (3, 65) =
6.51, 𝑝 = 0.003) and perceived trustworthiness (Adj. 𝑅2 = 0.733, 𝐹 (3, 65) = 50.4, 𝑝 < 0.001). There was no evidence
to support that voice type affects perceived intelligence or perceived trustworthiness, so we reject Hypotheses H1a
and H1b. However, the human or robotic voice manipulation did alter anthropomorphism (𝑝 = 0.033) and animacy
(𝑝 = 0.042), partially supporting Hypothesis H1c that vocal humanness will affect perceptions of humanness. The human
voice was not always perceived as more human than the robotic voice. This is discussed further in the Helpfulness and

Humanness section.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

HelpfulUnhelpful0246Milestones SolvedMilestones Solved after 30 MinutesHelpfulUnhelpful0246Milestones Solved after 40 MinutesHumanRobotPuzzle Master Helpfulness10

5.2 Agent Helpfulness

Westby, et al.

The outcomes of learning whether an agent was helpful or unhelpful may be reflected in perceived intelligence

and perceived trustworthiness. The helpfulness treatment assignment significantly predicted perceived intelligence
(𝑝 < 0.001, Table 2 Model 3) and perceived trustworthiness (𝑝 < 0.001, Table 2 Model 4). Over the course of forty
minutes, participants saw past the voice of the agent to objectively and correctly assess if the agent was intelligent

or trustworthy. This supports Hypotheses H2b and H2c, that helpful agents will be perceived as more intelligent and

trustworthy than unhelpful agents.

5.3 Helpfulness and Humanness

Treatment assignment significantly affected perceived humanness, but it was not voice alone that contributed to

this. Agent voice, agent helpfulness, and the interaction between the two were significant factors for regressions
on anthropomorphism and animacy. The interaction term (“Helpful × Human” in Table 2) for perceived humanness
(anthropomorphism and animacy) is negative, meaning agent helpfulness flips the effect of voice type on perceived

humanness. Helpfulness increases the perceived humanness of robotic-voiced agents whereas helpfulness decreases

perceived humanness of human-voiced agents. This supports Hypothesis H3b that there will be an interaction between

vocal type and helpfulness.

5.4 Team Performance

Treatment assignment caused differences in team performance at the three-quarter time point (𝐹 (2, 18) = 3.70, 𝑝 = 0.047,
Table 2 Model 5). With an adjusted 𝑅2 of 0.221, treatment assignment predicted 22.1% of the variance in a team’s
performance at the three-quarter mark. Of the two treatment variables, only agent helpfulness was a significant
factor (humanness, 𝑝 = 0.705; helpfulness, 𝒑 = 0.015) indicating agent helpfulness predicts team performance at
the three-quarter mark while agent voice type does not. This difference was not significant by the end of the puzzle
(𝐹 (2, 18) = 1.52, 𝑝 = 0.247, Adj. 𝑅2 = 0.05, Table 2 Model 6). At the three-quarter mark, teams were less likely to know
whether the agent was helpful or unhelpful than at the end of the puzzle. Upon realizing the agent was unhelpful,

several teams showed fast achievement of milestones before the 40 minute stopping time. Teams in the helpful agent
condition correctly solved 1.40 ± 0.520 more milestones than teams in the unhelpful condition irrespective of the vocal
type manipulation. These results provide partial support for Hypothesis H2a, that teams with a helpful agent will

perform better than teams with an unhelpful agent.

Because no significant differences were found between the performances of teams with human-voiced agents and

robotic-voiced agents, we reject Hypothesis H3a. Voice type did not affect a team’s receptivity to a helpful agent’s clues

or susceptibility to a robotic agent’s clues.

6 DISCUSSION

We manipulated the humanness and helpfulness of an audio-only agent in human-agent teams to study how the two

factors affect subjective and objective outcomes. Humanness of an agent’s voice had a negative interaction with an

agent’s helpfulness, resulting in flipped perceived anthropomorphism and animacy. A helpful robotic-voiced agent was

perceived as more human than an unhelpful robotic-voiced agent, and a helpful human-voiced agent was perceived as

less human than an unhelpful human-voiced agent. The agent’s vocal type only affected perceived humanness. It did not

Manuscript submitted to ACM

Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

11

change perceived intelligence, trust in the agent, or team performance, while the helpful/unhelpful agent manipulation

significantly affected all three.

6.1 Perception

The effect of being helpful on how human-like an artificial teammate appears has been the subject of conflicting research.

Faulty and less helpful teammates, when compared to flawless and more helpful teammates, have been rated higher

[35], lower [36], and the same [27] in perceived anthropomorphism. To isolate the potential confound of appearance,

voice, task, and environment, we designed audio-only agents with human or robotic voices. This factor interacted with

the manipulated helpfulness of its clues to alter human perceptions of the agent.

The observed interaction may be due to participants’ expectations of the agent, which could be either met or

violated. Humans may approach interactive situations with a set of scripts specifically developed for the subject of

their interaction [17, 28]. There are scripts for logging into a website, interacting with Siri, or talking to a friend. Here,

human-voiced agents may activate different scripts than robotic-voiced agents, producing different perceptions and

expectations. The robotic-voiced agent is seen as more human when it gives helpful clues, but the human-voiced agent

is seen as more human when it gives unhelpful clues. This may be because participants expected a human-voiced agent

to act more like them. The puzzle was difficult for most teams, with only three of the twenty teams completing it before

time expired. It is plausible that participants viewed the puzzle as beyond the human-voiced agent’s abilities, thus the

agent would struggle to be helpful just like the humans would struggle. On the other hand, they may have expected the

robotic-voiced agent to be more of an oracle with insights beyond human abilities. This also explains when the agents

were seen as less human. An all-knowing human-voiced agent did not fit with participant’s expectations for what a

human should know, and an unhelpful robotic-voiced agent violated established social scripts for interactions with

semi-intelligent technology. Designers who optimize for perceived humanness should be aware of the many factors

that change this experience.

Unlike perceived anthropomorphism and animacy, only helpfulness affected participant perceptions of agent in-

telligence and trustworthiness. This shows that perceived intelligence and trustworthiness can be objective once

participants have time to interact with the agent. They successfully learn when agents are unhelpful and rate the agent

as such. This aligns with prior work on trust calibration [12, 24] and on the effect of helpfulness versus humanness

on trust [23]. Designers who want to increase perceived intelligence and trustworthiness of agents in HATs should

improve agent functionality before fine-tuning appearances. We find that participants saw beyond the differences in

vocal type and objectively rated the agent’s intelligence and trustworthiness based on ability and contribution.

6.2 Performance

Teams with a helpful agent solved significantly more milestones than teams with an unhelpful agent after 30 minutes.

Looking deeper, that influence was not from whether the agent had a human or robotic voice. Instead it was only from

whether the agent gave helpful clues or unhelpful clues. Although treatment assignment did not significantly influence

final team performance, this result contextualizes design priorities for performance-focused human-agent teams. Similar

to our recommendation for optimizing intelligence and trust, designers should fully optimize agent ability before making

marginal gains with appearance and physical characteristics. A helpful agent with non-human-like presentation or

communication will be more effective than a less helpful agent with human-like presentation or communication. With

time, human teammates can calibrate their interpretation of actions that an agent takes [12] and move past short-term

subjective effects caused by the agent’s form. Function matters more.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

12

7 CONCLUSIONS

Westby, et al.

We show that voice-type mixed with the abilities of an agent combine in counter-intuitive ways to alter perceived

humanness. This interaction does not apply to other measures. Team performance, perceived agent intelligence, and

agent trustworthiness were all dependent on agent ability, not voice type. These are more objective measures of team

contributions, so it is unlikely that the form of an agent will have more effect than the function.

Limitations. Two major factors that we do not manipulate are task type and environment. Every team was on a

video-conferencing call on identical laptops in unfamiliar rooms with a team of strangers solving a difficult puzzle.

Changing any of these variables may change perceptions and performance. Regardless, the purpose of this study is to

reveal the sensitive nature of perceived humanness and the objective nature of performance, intelligence, and trust.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Kristen Flaherty, Robin Lange, and Eri Lee. This work was supported

by the Army Research Laboratory [Grant W911NF-19-2-0135].

REFERENCES

[1] Robert K Atkinson, Richard E Mayer, and Mary Margaret Merrill. 2005. Fostering social agency in multimedia learning: Examining the impact of an

animated agent’s voice. Contemporary Educational Psychology 30, 1 (2005), 117–139.

[2] Gagan Bansal, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Daniel S Weld, Walter S Lasecki, and Eric Horvitz. 2019. Updates in human-ai teams: Understanding and

addressing the performance/compatibility tradeoff. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33. 2429–2437.

[3] Christoph Bartneck, Dana Kulić, Elizabeth Croft, and Susana Zoghbi. 2009. Measurement instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability,

perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots. International journal of social robotics 1, 1 (2009), 71–81.

[4] Caterina Bérubé, Theresa Schachner, Roman Keller, Elgar Fleisch, Florian v Wangenheim, Filipe Barata, and Tobias Kowatsch. 2021. Voice-based
conversational agents for the prevention and management of chronic and mental health conditions: systematic literature review. Journal of medical
Internet research 23, 3 (2021), e25933.

[5] Vannevar Bush et al. 1945. As we may think. The Atlantic Monthly 176, 1 (1945), 101–108.
[6] Jessie YC Chen and Michael J Barnes. 2012. Supervisory control of multiple robots: Effects of imperfect automation and individual differences.

Human Factors 54, 2 (2012), 157–174.

[7] Emna Chérif and Jean-François Lemoine. 2019. Anthropomorphic virtual assistants and the reactions of Internet users: An experiment on the

assistant’s voice. Recherche et Applications en Marketing (English Edition) 34, 1 (2019), 28–47.

[8] Erin K Chiou, Noah L Schroeder, and Scotty D Craig. 2020. How we trust, perceive, and learn from virtual humans: The influence of voice quality.

Computers & Education 146 (2020), 103756.

[9] Myke C Cohen, Mustafa Demir, Erin K Chiou, and Nancy J Cooke. 2021. The Dynamics of Trust and Verbal Anthropomorphism in Human-Autonomy

Teaming. In 2021 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Human-Machine Systems (ICHMS). IEEE, 1–6.

[10] Filipa Correia, Samuel Mascarenhas, Rui Prada, Francisco S Melo, and Ana Paiva. 2018. Group-based emotions in teams of humans and robots. In

2018 13th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 261–269.

[11] Ewart J De Visser, Samuel S Monfort, Ryan McKendrick, Melissa AB Smith, Patrick E McKnight, Frank Krueger, and Raja Parasuraman. 2016. Almost

human: Anthropomorphism increases trust resilience in cognitive agents. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 22, 3 (2016), 331.

[12] Mustafa Demir, Nathan J McNeese, Jaime C Gorman, Nancy J Cooke, Christopher W Myers, and David A Grimm. 2021. Exploration of teammate

trust and interaction dynamics in human-autonomy teaming. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 51, 6 (2021), 696–705.

[13] Mary T Dzindolet, Scott A Peterson, Regina A Pomranky, Linda G Pierce, and Hall P Beck. 2003. The role of trust in automation reliance. International

journal of human-computer studies 58, 6 (2003), 697–718.

[14] Nicholas Epley, Adam Waytz, and John T Cacioppo. 2007. On seeing human: a three-factor theory of anthropomorphism. Psychological review 114, 4

(2007), 864.

[15] Janik Festerling and Iram Siraj. 2022. Anthropomorphizing technology: a conceptual review of anthropomorphism research and how it relates to

children’s engagements with digital voice assistants. Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science 56, 3 (2022), 709–738.

[16] Christopher Flathmann, Beau G Schelble, Patrick J Rosopa, Nathan J McNeese, Rohit Mallick, and Kapil Chalil Madathil. 2023. Examining the impact

of varying levels of AI teammate influence on human-AI teams. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies (2023), 103061.

[17] Andrew Gambino, Jesse Fox, and Rabindra A Ratan. 2020. Building a stronger CASA: Extending the computers are social actors paradigm.

Human-Machine Communication 1 (2020), 71–85.

Manuscript submitted to ACM

Tradeoffs in Helpfulness and Humanness of Agent Voice

13

[18] Peter A Hancock, Deborah R Billings, Kristin E Schaefer, Jessie YC Chen, Ewart J De Visser, and Raja Parasuraman. 2011. A meta-analysis of factors

affecting trust in human-robot interaction. Human factors 53, 5 (2011), 517–527.

[19] Allyson I Hauptman, Wen Duan, and Nathan J Mcneese. 2022. The Components of Trust for Collaborating With AI Colleagues. In Companion

Publication of the 2022 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 72–75.

[20] Peter H Kahn Jr, Aimee L Reichert, Heather E Gary, Takayuki Kanda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Solace Shen, Jolina H Ruckert, and Brian Gill. 2011. The new
ontological category hypothesis in human-robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Human-robot interaction. 159–160.
[21] Kohei Kawaguchi. 2021. When will workers follow an algorithm? A field experiment with a retail business. Management Science 67, 3 (2021),

1670–1695.

[22] Katherine C Kellogg, Melissa A Valentine, and Angele Christin. 2020. Algorithms at work: The new contested terrain of control. Academy of

Management Annals 14, 1 (2020), 366–410.

[23] Philipp Kulms and Stefan Kopp. 2019. More human-likeness, more trust? The effect of anthropomorphism on self-reported and behavioral trust in

continued and interdependent human-agent cooperation. In Proceedings of mensch und computer 2019. 31–42.

[24] John D Lee and Katrina A See. 2004. Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance. Human factors 46, 1 (2004), 50–80.
[25] Joseph CR Licklider. 1960. Man-computer symbiosis. IRE transactions on human factors in electronics 1 (1960), 4–11.
[26] Nathan J McNeese, Mustafa Demir, Nancy J Cooke, and Christopher Myers. 2018. Teaming with a synthetic teammate: Insights into human-autonomy

teaming. Human factors 60, 2 (2018), 262–273.

[27] Nicole Mirnig, Gerald Stollnberger, Markus Miksch, Susanne Stadler, Manuel Giuliani, and Manfred Tscheligi. 2017. To err is robot: How humans

assess and act toward an erroneous social robot. Frontiers in Robotics and AI (2017), 21.

[28] Clifford Nass and Youngme Moon. 2000. Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. Journal of social issues 56, 1 (2000), 81–103.
[29] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine et al. 2021. Human-AI teaming: State-of-the-art and research needs. (2021).
[30] Thomas O’Neill, Nathan McNeese, Amy Barron, and Beau Schelble. 2022. Human–autonomy teaming: A review and analysis of the empirical

literature. Human factors 64, 5 (2022), 904–938.

[31] Rohan Paleja, Muyleng Ghuy, Nadun Ranawaka Arachchige, Reed Jensen, and Matthew Gombolay. 2021. The utility of explainable ai in ad hoc

human-machine teaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 610–623.

[32] Ye Pan and Anthony Steed. 2017. The impact of self-avatars on trust and collaboration in shared virtual environments. PloS one 12, 12 (2017),

e0189078.

[33] Raja Parasuraman and Victor Riley. 1997. Humans and automation: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human factors 39, 2 (1997), 230–253.
[34] Alisha Pradhan, Leah Findlater, and Amanda Lazar. 2019. " Phantom Friend" or" Just a Box with Information" Personification and Ontological
Categorization of Smart Speaker-based Voice Assistants by Older Adults. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019),
1–21.

[35] Maha Salem, Friederike Eyssel, Katharina Rohlfing, Stefan Kopp, and Frank Joublin. 2013. To err is human (-like): Effects of robot gesture on

perceived anthropomorphism and likability. International Journal of Social Robotics 5, 3 (2013), 313–323.

[36] Maha Salem, Gabriella Lakatos, Farshid Amirabdollahian, and Kerstin Dautenhahn. 2015. Would you trust a (faulty) robot? Effects of error, task type
and personality on human-robot cooperation and trust. In 2015 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE,
1–8.

[37] William Seymour and Max Van Kleek. 2021. Exploring Interactions Between Trust, Anthropomorphism, and Relationship Development in Voice

Assistants. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (2021), 1–16.

[38] Susan P Shapiro. 2005. Agency theory. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 31 (2005), 263–284.
[39] Christiana Tsiourti, Astrid Weiss, Katarzyna Wac, and Markus Vincze. 2019. Multimodal integration of emotional signals from voice, body, and
context: Effects of (in) congruence on emotion recognition and attitudes towards robots. International Journal of Social Robotics 11 (2019), 555–573.
[40] Samuel Westby and Christoph Riedl. 2023. Collective intelligence in human-AI teams: A Bayesian theory of mind approach. In Proceedings of the

AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 37. 6119–6127.

Received 15 July 2023

Manuscript submitted to ACM

