2
2
0
2

y
a
M
0
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
6
9
9
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1

A Fully Controllable Agent in the Path Planning
using Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

GyeongTaek Lee, Member, IEEE,

Abstract—The aim of path planning is to reach the goal from starting point by searching for an agent’s route. In the path planning, the
routes may vary depending on the number of variables such that it is important for the agent to reach various goals. Numerous studies,
however, have dealt with a single goal that is predeﬁned by the user. In the present study, I propose a novel reinforcement learning
framework for a fully controllable agent in the path planning. To do this, I propose a bi-directional memory editing to obtain various
bi-directional trajectories of the agent, in which the agent’s behavior and sub-goals are trained on the goal-conditioned RL. As for the
agent’s to move in various directions, I utilize the sub-goals dedicated network, separated from a policy network. Lastly, I present the
reward shaping to shorten the number of steps for the agent to reach the goal. In the experimental result, the agent was able to reach
the various goals that have never been visited by the agent in the training. We conﬁrmed that the agent could perform difﬁcult missions
such as a round trip and the agent used the shorter route with the reward shaping.

Index Terms—Controllable agent, path planning, goal-conditioned reinforcement learning, bi-directional memory editing.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

P ATH planning is a method to ﬁnd an optimal route

from the starting point to the target point. It has been
widely used in various ﬁelds such as robotics [1], [2], [3],
drone [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], military service [10], [11], and
self-driving car [12], [13]. Recently, reinforcement learning
(RL) has been mainly studied for the path planning [3],
[7], [9], [10], [11], [14], [15], [16], [17]. To get an optimal
solution, it is essential to give enough reward for an agent
to reach the goal and to set up a speciﬁc environment.
Several studies on learning the RL model have proposed
to make an agent be robust in a complicated or an unknown
environment for the path planning [18], [19], [20]. However,
existing studies have deﬁned one single goal before the
learning. That is, the agent’s ability to search the path when
completed learning can be limited. To make the agent reach
a number of goals in a dynamic environment, learning a
controllable agent is needed. One of the recent approaches
for controlling the agent has a limitation in that the agent
can only learn the behavior from trajectories that have been
directly experienced [21]. Therefore, the agent can only be
under control in the area visited by the agent. In this paper,
I focus on learning a fully controllable agent in the path
planning using a goal-conditioned RL. Especially, I apply,
to the goal-conditioned RL, a bi-directional memory editing
and a sub-goals dedicated network to improve the ability to
search the path of the agent.

In the goal-conditioned RL, the agent learns the sub-
goals, part of the trajectory of the agent [22], [23], [24],
[25], [26]. By learning the sub-goals, eventually, the agent
can reach the ﬁnal goal. This method showed good per-
formance mainly in robotics. However, previous studies

• GyeongTaek Lee is with Department of Industrial and Systems Engi-
neering, Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, 96
Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, 08854, NJ, USA
E-mail: gyeongtaek.lee@rutgers.edu

Manuscript received May 19, 2022; revised August 26, 2022.

Fig. 1. Examples of training and test environment in this study. The
experiment was set as a simple version of the two-dimensional grid
environment. The starting point and the target point were ﬁxed at the
location in the training environment. The policy of the agent is to search
the path from the starting point to the target point. (a), The training
environment was set for the agent to easily get an optimal route. (b),
The test environment was set for the agent to get an optimal route in a
difﬁcult way. Several sub-goals including the ﬁnal goal were given to the
agent.

have focused on reaching a complicated single goal. In
addition, the multi-goal RL model, in which the agent can
perform many goals, has been proposed [27], [28]. However,
the multi-goals should also be deﬁned before the learning.
Unlike these studies, in this present study, I propose an RL
framework in which the agent can perform a number of sub-
goals in various scenarios. An important point here is that
the sub-goals are not deﬁned in advance. In other words,
the agent completed the learning reaches the goals, which
have never been visited by the agent in the learning.

Fig 1 shows the examples of the training and the test
environments of this study. The training environment has

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

been simply set for the agent to reach the ﬁnal goal. But
the test environments have been set in a difﬁcult way. The
agent should go through the sub-goals and reach the target
point, even if the starting point and the target point are set in
reverse. The difﬁcult missions were also given to the agent
such as a round trip. In the test environments, an important
thing is that the agent has to reach the goal never been
visited in the learning. To perform the goals, the agent must
be fully controlled by the sub-goals that are customized by
the user.

Meanwhile, memory editing occurs in our daily lives.
[29], [30], [31], [32]. The memory editing helps us to get
away from mental illnesses such as trauma [32]. We can
also get precise information by editing untidy memories
[31]. A recent study used the concept of the memory editing
on goal-conditioned RL for the agent to reach sub-goals so
that the user can control the agent [21]. However, the agent
cannot move the sub-goals in difﬁcult environments. This is
because the memory of the RL model is edited only based on
one direction of the paths that are moved by the agent. The
ﬁrst purpose of the RL is to achieve the ﬁnal goal. Despite
the sub-goals, the agent can ignore the sub-goals if the sub-
goals get in the way of the ﬁnal goal. That is, the agent does
not need to go round and round to reach the ﬁnal goal. In
this study, I developed the concept of the memory editing
for the fully controllable agent in the path planning.

Let’s assume that we walk to the destination (See Fig 2).
From the route that we walked, we can learn how we reach
the destination. We can remember intermediate stops in the
route and know that the total path is the overall set, which
consists of the intermediate stops. Further, if we recall our
memories backward, we can also ﬁnd the route back to the
starting point. For example, in the Fig 2, when we want to
return to the starting point, we know which action we have
to perform. However, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd an inverse action
in a dynamic RL environment. Thus, an inverse module to
predict the inverse action is necessary to obtain the exact
knowledge to come back to the starting point.

Based on the processes, in which we recall our memories
and obtain knowledge, I utilize a bi-directional memory
reminiscence and editing (bi-directional memory editing)
to obtain various trajectories. Using these trajectories, the
agent can learn various behaviors. Furthermore, I use the
dedicated network for learning the sub-goals to improve
learning efﬁciency. Finally, I present a reward shaping for
the shorter path of the agent. Using these techniques, the
agent can achieve various sub-tasks as well as the ﬁnal goal
in the path planning environment. The fully controllable
agent can be useful in the environments where we have
to consider a number of variables and we have to assume
various scenarios. The main contributions of this article are
as follows:

• Using the bi-directional memory editing, we can
obtain various trajectories, and can learn the agent to
perform various tasks, based on the trajectories. The
agent can be fully controlled so that the agent can
reach any point in the path planning environment.

•

I employ the sub-goals dedicated network to
improve the efﬁciency of learning the sub-goals. To

2

Fig. 2.
Illustration of the concept of the bi-directional memory editing.
After we arrive at the destination, if we recall our memory, we can ﬁnd
out the route for returning to the starting point. Further, we can also
obtain knowledge about which action to perform to reach the starting
point.

distinguish the network from the policy network, the
agent can focus on performing the various sub-goals.

•

I propose the reward shaping for the shorter path
of the agent. In the path planning, it is important
for the agent not only to reach the ﬁnal goal but
also to reach it within a limited time. By applying
the reward shaping in the bi-directional memory
editing, the agent can reach the ﬁnal goal within a
shorter time.

• To the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst
RL methodology for the path planning in that the
agent is fully under control. Therefore, the agent
achieves the user-deﬁned sub-goals such as a round
trip in a difﬁcult test environment. Moreover, the
agent can move to the point that has never been
reached by the agent in the training. By using this
methodology, we can suppose and conduct various
scenarios in the path planning.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2
presents the background of this study. In Section 3, learning
a fully controllable agent is proposed. To do this, I introduce
the bi-directional memory editing and the sub-goals dedi-
cated network. Furthermore, I propose the reward shaping
for the shorter path of the agent. Section 4 provides the
results of the experiment. I conﬁrmed whether the agent
can successfully perform the sub-goals in various scenarios.
Section 5 concludes this paper and calls for future research.

2 BACKGROUND

2.1 Path planning

To get an optimal solution to reach the target point from
the starting point, traditionally, optimization methods have
been used in the path planning. Several studies using an
A* [33], [34], a genetic algorithm [35], and a particle swarm
optimization [36], [37], [38] have been proposed. Combining
two optimization methods also has been studied [39].

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

3

Fig. 3. Illustration of the proposed method. The red line indicates the route visited by the agent. The blue line indicates the inverse direction of the
route. The inverse module predicts the action when st and st+1 are given, and the predicted action is used to collect the reverse trajectories. In the
bi-directional memory editing, various sub-goals are generated and stored in the separated replay memory (Ds). The transition samples from Ds
are trained by the sub-goals dedicated network.

Recently, with the development of deep learning, stud-
ies on the path planning using the RL have mainly been
proposed [3], [6], [7], [9], [10], [11], [14], [15], [16], [17], [40],
[41], [42]. They have supposed the speciﬁc scenario and set
an environment to apply the agent in the path planning.
Especially, they have applied their study to robotics [3], [7],
[16], drone [4], [5], [6], [8], [9], [42], and ship [43], [44]. Also,
they have focused on the one single goal of the agent to
reach the target point, avoiding obstacles. After learning
is completed, the agent could reach the goal; however, the
agent cannot be under control in the previous studies. That
is, the agent can only perform the predeﬁned goal.

In addition, learning user-deﬁned sub-goals has been
proposed [21]. However, the agent was partially under
control. The agent could not perform the round trip and
only moved the area that was visited by the agent. In this
study, I focus on learning the fully controllable agent so that
the agent can perform various trips, as shown in Fig 1.b.

2.2 Goal-conditioned RL

Hindsight experience replay (HER) used the sub-goals and
the pseudo rewards to make the RL model converge to the
ﬁnal policy [45]. The reason why learning the sub-goals
improves the performance of the RL is that the sub-goals
are located on the route to reaching the ﬁnal goal. Several
studies developed the HER for an exploration of the agent
[46], [47], [48].

The goal-conditional RL models excel to reach the goal
through the intermediate sub-goals and show excellent
performance on the robotics problem [22], [23], [24], [25],
[26], [27], [28], [49], [50], [51], [52], [53]. They have focused
on searching for meaningful sub-goals and improving the
performance of the main policy network (high-level policy
network). To reach the desired policy, it is important to
induce the agent to reach the landmark of the sub-goals
[24], [27], [49], [51], [54] and to improve sample efﬁciency

[52], [55], [56]. The existing studies with learning the sub-
goals are similar to this study in terms of generating the
sub-goals and relabeling the rewards.

However, in this study, the sample efﬁciency and search-
ing for the valid sub-goals are not essential. By performing
the bi-directional memory editing, we can get trajectories
two times more than when bi-directional memory editing
is not performed. Then, enough sub-goals can be collected
for learning the sub-goals. Also, it does not matter the time
when the sub-goals dedicated network is trained, which is
separated from the original policy network. Whether the
sub-goals are trained after learning the policy network or
during learning the policy network, if sufﬁcient trajectories
are gathered, the agent can learn various behaviors and
sub-goals. The main purpose of this study is to make the
agent under control for performing various tasks which are
not deﬁned in the training environment. After learning is
completed, the agent can achieve various user-deﬁned sub-
goals as well as the ﬁnal goal.

I consider a discounted, ﬁnite-horizon, goal-conditioned
Markov decision process
(MDP) deﬁned as a tuple
(S, G, A, p, R, γ, H), where S is the set of state, G is the
set of goals, A is set of actions, p(st+1|st, at) is a dynamics
function, R is the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the dis-
counted factor, and H is the horizon. In the goal-conditioned
RL, the agent learns to maximize the expected discounted
cumulative reward E[(cid:80)∞
t=1 R(st, g, t)], where g is the goal.
The objective is to obtain a policy π(at|st, g, t).

3 PROPOSED METHOD
Fig 3 shows the illustration of a summary of the proposed
method. For the fully controllable agent in the path plan-
ning, I introduce three simple techniques. First, I propose a
bi-directional memory editing to generate various behaviors
and sub-goals of the agent. Here, to secure reverse trajecto-
ries, an inverse module to predict actions is used. Second,

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

to improve the efﬁciency of learning, I utilize the sub-
goals dedicated network separated from the policy network.
Finally, I present a reward shaping for the shorter path of the
agent.

3.1 Bi-directional memory editing

The memory editing is performed to generate sub-goals of
the agent. The sub-goals are generated from the trajectories
of the agent, and additional rewards are given to the agent.
As the agent begins to recognize the sub-goals, the agent
can achieve the sub-goals and greedily reach the ﬁnal goal
in the previous studies.

In the path planning, it is important to allow the agent
to visit a wider area such that the agent can visit various
locations and learn the optimal route to reach the goal. Thus,
if we can get various trajectories more than the trajectories
that are actually visited by the agent, it can bring greater
beneﬁt to learning the agent’s ability for searching the path.
In addition to a forward route, the reverse route from the
goal to the starting point can be a useful ingredient for the
agent to learn various behaviors and sub-goals. To do this, I
employ the reverse trajectory to generate various sub-goals
and to learn the robust RL model by performing the bi-
directional memory editing.

First, a forward memory editing is performed, which
is described in line 21-24 in Algorithm 1. The sub-goals
(g) are generated from the forward route, and the state of
the sub-goals (st+1(cid:107)g) are made. After that, a backward
memory editing is performed, which is described in line 25-
29 in Algorithm 1. Reverse transition is {(st+1, a(cid:48)
t+1, rt, st)}
whereas original transition is {(st, at, rt, st+1)}. Here, it is
difﬁcult to obtain a(cid:48)
t+1. The reason is that it is not simple to
ﬁnd an action to derive the st, when st+1 is given. I propose
to use the inverse module to obtain ˆat+1 by predicting a(cid:48)
t+1
when st and st+1 are given. Like the forward memory
editing, the sub-goals (g) and the state of the sub-goals
(st+1(cid:107)g) are generated. Finally, the edited memories are
stored in the replay memory for the sub-goals (D∫ ).

Using the bi-directional memory editing, we can obtain
two routes from the one single route moved by the agent.
Beyond being two times the trajectories, it means that the
agent can learn various relationships between the actions
and the sub-goals. In the path planning, the agent can
almost only learn the route that is visited by the agent. For
instance, as shown in Fig 1.(a), the agent can almost learn
the leftward and upward directions because of the location
of the goal. However, using the bi-directional memory edit-
ing, the agent can learn all directions in various locations.
Therefore, by learning a number of sub-goals and behaviors,
the agent can reach the goals that were never visited in the
training.

3.2 The sub-goals dedicated network

Using the bi-directional memory editing, the agent can learn
various behaviors and sub-goals. However, the agent at the
middle of the route can be confused about where the agent
has to go. Because the agent is forced to learn how to go
in both directions at one point due to the bi-directionally
edited memories. For example, in the Fig 2, if the agent
is located near the tree, the agent learns to move both

4

for episode = 1, M do

\\ Simulation stage.
for each step do

Algorithm 1 Learning the sub-goals using bi-directional
memory editing
1: Initialize policy network parameters θp
2: Initialize sub-goals dedicated network parameters θg
3: Initialize inverse module parameters θiv
4: Initialize replay buffer for original goal D ← ∅
5: Initialize replay buffer for sub-goals D∫ ← ∅
6: procedure LEARNING THE SUB-GOALS
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:

Execute an action st, at, et, st+1 ≈ πθ(at | st)
Store transition E ← E ∪ {(st, at, rt)}
Optimize inverse module θiv

\\Bi-directional memory editing
Generate sub-goals g
Generate state of sub-goals st(cid:107)g

Compute returns Rt = Σ∞
D ← D ∪ {(st, at, Rt)}
Clear episode buffer E ← ∅

end for
if st+1 is terminal then

k γk−trk in E

(cid:46) (cid:107) denotes

end if

Set additional rewards r(cid:48)
t
D∫ ← D∫ ∪ {st(cid:107)g, at, r(cid:48)
t)}
Predict the inverse action ˆat+1 ← θiv(st+1, st)
Generate reverse transition {(st+1, ˆat+1, rt, st)}
Generate sub-goals g
Generate state of sub-goals st+1(cid:107)g
Set additional rewards r(cid:48)(cid:48)
t
st ← st+1,at ← ˆat+1,rt ← r(cid:48)(cid:48)
t
D∫ ← D∫ ∪ {st(cid:107)g, at, r(cid:48)

t)}

\\Learning stage.
for k= 1, N do

end for
for k= 1, P do

Sample a minibatch {(s, a, R)} from D

(cid:46) Optimize policy network θp

Sample a minibatch {(s(cid:107)g, a, r(cid:48))} from D∫

(cid:46) Optimize sub-goals dedicated network θg

concatenation

23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:
35:
36:
37:
38:
39:
40:
41:
42:
43: end procedure

end for

end for

upwards and leftwards. If the agent is trained using the
policy network, the agent can be confused about where
the agent has to go if the agent is located near the tree.
Because the purpose of the policy network is only to train
the agent to reach the ﬁnal goal. Actually, the agent has
been hovering around the middle point of the environment
in the experiment. Therefore, I employ the network for the
sub-goals separately from the network for the ﬁnal goal.

The sub-goals dedicated network only learns the sub-
goals, and the original policy network only learns the ﬁnal
goal. To do this, I also employ the replay memory for the
sub-goals (D∫ ) in addition to replay memory for the ﬁnal

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

goal (D). Moreover, using the sub-goals dedicated network
can improve the sample efﬁciency. In general, the capacity
of the replay memory is limited and the replay memory
is updated with the last transition of the agent. Thus, the
agent mainly learns the recent transitions and gradually
reaches the goal. However, as previously mentioned, using
the bi-directional memory editing, we can obtain a number
of sub-goals and behavior of the agent. Therefore, using the
separated network and the replay memory, we can learn the
agent to reach the sub-goals whenever, during or after the
policy network learning.

Although the agent of the policy network cannot reach
the ﬁnal policy, the agent of the sub-goals dedicated network
can reach the various sub-goals as well as the ﬁnal goal.
The users can fully control the agent by collecting various
sub-goals from the bi-directional memory editing and by
learning the agent on the sub-goals dedicated network.

3.3 Reward shaping for the shorter path

In the path planning, one of the important factors is to make
the agent reach the destination within a speciﬁc period. To
improve the agent’s ability, it is necessary to give enough
rewards according to the steps to reach the target point.
However, in this study, I focus on learning the sub-goals,
and additional rewards are given to the agent to reach the
sub-goals, regardless of the shortest path. Furthermore, I
want to conﬁrm that the agent can reach various sub-points
in the environment. Thus, I assume that the environment of
this study is a sparse reward environment so that the agent
does not need to reach the target point in the shortest path.
Rather, due to the exploration bonus, it is likely for the agent
to delay the one’s arrival. Therefore, we propose the reward
shaping when the bi-directional editing is performed for the
shorter path of the agent in the path planning. When the
bi-directional editing is performed, the additional rewards
(r(cid:48)
t) are given with the corresponding sub-goals. Here, the
rewards are reshaped as follows:

rtg = r(cid:48)

t + (distshort–distst)

(1)

: where distshort indicates the number of the shortest steps
that can be possibly reached by the agent from st to the
current sub-goal (gs), and distst indicates the number of
steps of the path that is moved by the agent from st to the
current sub-goal (gs). That is, in each sub-goal, the agent
gets a penalty by the number of steps to reach the sub-
goal point. If the agent reaches the sub-goal in the shortest
path, the agent does not receive any penalty. Otherwise, the
agent receives a penalty depending on the number of steps
to reach the sub-goal points.

3.4 Learning a fully controllable agent in the path plan-
ning

Fig 3 shows the summary of the proposed method. The
inverse module predicts the action of when st and st+1
are given in the bi-directional memory editing. The sub-
goals from two trajectories are generated. At this time, the
reward shaping for the shorter path is performed. Then,
the transitions are stored in the replay memory for the
sub-goals (D∫ ). The sub-goals dedicated network is trained
independently with the policy network, whereas the policy

5

network is only trained for the ﬁnal policy. After learning is
completed, in the various scenarios, the agent gets the sub-
goals that are deﬁned by the users and tried to achieve the
sub-goals as well as the ﬁnal goal.

Algorithm 1 shows the procedure in the proposed
method in detail. The simulation stage is similar to the other
RL methods except for the inverse module to obtain ˆat+1 by
predict a(cid:48)
t+1 when st and st+1 are given. In the bi-directional
memory editing, the reverse transition {(st+1, ˆat+1, rt, st)}
is obtained using the inverse module and various sub-
goals are generated and stored in the memory (Ds). In the
learning stage, optimize the policy network (θp) for the ﬁnal
goal and optimize the sub-goals dedicated network (θg)
for the sub-goals. In fact, it does not matter to learn the
goals dedicated network separately after learning the policy
network is completed, if the number of the edited memories
is enough.

4 EXPERIMENTS

4.1 Experimental setting

In the experiments, I wanted to conﬁrm that the agent can
be fully controlled by the sub-goals and that the agent can
achieve various sub-goals, which were never visited by the
agent in the learning. Thus, the training environment was
constructed in a simpler way, while the test environment in
a difﬁcult way. I assumed a number of scenarios to test the
agent’s ability of the path searching. Furthermore, I wanted
to show the effect of the reward shaping for the shorter path.
Fig 1 shows the ﬁrst environment. The goal of the agent
was set to reach the target point in a simple two-dimensional
(2D) grid environment. The reward was 0 except for the
agent reaching the target point (+30). The RL model was
performed for a total of 10,000 episodes. In the test en-
vironment, I set a total of 26 scenarios. In each scenario,
several sub-goals were given to the agent. At ﬁrst, a sub-
goal nearest the current location of the agent was given to
the agent. Then, if the agent reaches the sub-goal, the next
sub-goal nearest the current location was given. Also, if the
agent could not reach the given sub-goal, the next sub-goal
nearest the current location was given. In various scenarios,
I observed whether the agent reaches various sub-goals and
successfully performs difﬁcult missions such as a round
trip. Moreover, I compared with and without the reward
shaping for the shorter path in the proposed method. In
each scenario, I calculated the number of steps to reach the
target point.

Fig 4 shows the second environment. The environment
is the ‘key-door domain’. The environment has a total of 4
stages and the agent should go through the bonus point
(key) to clear the stage (door). Even though the agent
reaches the target point (door), if the agent could not pass
the bonus point (key), the agent cannot jump up to the
next stage. The reward was set +10 for a bonus point, -10
for a penalty point, and +100 for the goal, when the agent
goes through these points, respectively. This environment
was difﬁcult because of the condition that the agent must
pass the bonus point to clear each stage and that the envi-
ronment was deﬁned as the sparse reward setting. The RL
model performed for a total of 50,000 episodes. In the test

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

6

Fig. 4. The key-door domain environment. In each stage, the factors
(a starting point, a bonus point, a wall, and a target point) were set
differently. The agent must go through the bonus point to clear the stage.
Even if the agent reaches the target point if the agent did not go through
the bonus point, the agent cannot pass by the next stage.

environment, I set the two scenarios. In each stage, two sub-
goals, deﬁned by the user, the bonus point, and the goal,
were given to the agent as the sub-goals in an order.

4.2 Base architecture of the RL model

Self-imitation learning (SIL) is an on-policy algorithm to
exploit valuable past decisions from the replay memory
[57]. In the learning stage, the transitions are sampled, and
they are trained by the policy network. At this time, if the
transitions of the past are not valuable compared to the
current value, the transitions are not exploited. That is, the
SIL imitates valuable behaviors of the agent in the past. The
authors combined the SIL and the on-policy RL model [58],
[59] and proposed the following off-policy actor-critic loss:

L = Es,a,R∈D[Lpolicy + βLvalue],

Lpolicy = −logπθ(a|s)(R − Vθ(S))+,

Lvalue =

1
2

(cid:107) (R − Vθ(S))+ (cid:107)2,

(2)

(3)

(4)

where (·)+ = max(·, 0); πθ and Vθ(s) are the policy network
and the value network, respectively, parameterized by θ.
The value loss is controlled by β ∈ R+. From the (·)+
operator in the loss, the transition, in which the current
value is larger than the past return, is trained by the policy
network and the value network.

The reason why that the SIL is used in the study is
that the exploitation of valuable transition is needed. In
fact, in the study, the off-policy RL model is necessary to
utilize the replay memory [60], [61], [62]. However, in the
path planning, to reach the target point, various routes can
be obtained. Accordingly, I utilize the off-policy actor-critic
RL model to get an effect of both the on-policy and the
off-policy. The ﬁnal RL architecture in this study is the
combination of the SIL and the actor-critic network (ASIL).

Fig. 5. The visualization of the path of the agent for the ﬁrst environment.
A color change from blue to red indicates that the agent has visited more
often. a, The path of the agent of the policy network without learning
the sub-goals. The agent easily reached the target point. b, The path
of the agent of policy network with learning the sub-goals using the bi-
directional memory editing. The agent was confused by the sub-goals,
so that the agent could not reach the ﬁnal goal.

In addition, I utilized the random network distillation
(RND), which is widely used as an exploration bonus
method [63]. The RND uses two networks: a ﬁxed and ran-
dom initialized network (target network), and a predictor
network trained using the output of the target network.
The exploration bonus is given as a difference between the
outputs of the two networks. If the agent visits a speciﬁc
point continually, the exploration bonus is gradually de-
creased. Otherwise, if the agent visits a novel space, a large
exploration bonus will be given to the agent.

4.3 Simple 2D grid environment

Fig 5 shows the visualization of the path that is moved by
the agent of the policy network without (a) and with (b)
learning the sub-goals. A color change from blue to red
means that the agent has visited more often. When the
policy network did not learn the sub-goals, the agent of
the policy network easily reached the target point, and the
agent mostly moved only between the starting point and
the target point. That is, the agent mostly moved the left
and top areas in the environment because of the location of
the target point.

In addition, if the policy network was trained on the
sub-goals using the bi-directional memory editing, the agent
of the policy network could not reach the target point, as
shown in Fig 5.b. At a speciﬁc point, if the agent is trained
to go in various directions by the sub-goals, the agent of
the policy network was confused about where it has to
go. Then, the agent would fail to reach the ﬁnal goal. In
the experiment, the agent just moved to the right area in
the environment. This case was repeated every time the
network was trained. Notably, in the experiment, the agent

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

7

Fig. 6. a, The visualization of the path of the agent of the policy network with learning the sub-goals. The agent could not learn the sub-goals so the
agent had a tendency to just move to the right. b, The visualization of the path of the agent of the sub-dedicated network with the forward directional
memory editing. The agent was trained using a one-directional route. Therefore, the agent tried leftward, even though the given sub-goals were
located on the right of the agent.

Fig. 7. The visualization of the path of the agent when the sub-goals were given in the test environment according to the reward shaping. The top
and the bottom of the ﬁgure indicate the route of the agent without and with the reward shaping, respectively. (a), The agent successfully went
through the sub-goals and reached the ﬁnal goal. (b), In a round-trip environment, the agent also passed all the sub-goals and came back to the
starting point. With the reward shaping (bottom), the agent arrived at each sub-goal point and the ﬁnal goal faster than without the reward shaping
(top).

of the policy network without learning the sub-goals always
could reach the ﬁnal goal. In the test environment, the agent
of the policy network, which learns the sub-goals using bi-
directional editing, also failed to reach the sub-goals, as
shown in Fig 6.a. The agent even left the environment as
soon as the agent departed, as shown in Fig 6.a.(left). This
is because the agent of the policy network mainly moved to
the right area in the environment due to the confusion.

When the sub-goals dedicated network was trained us-
ing the forward directional memory editing only, the agent
failed to reach the sub-goals, as shown in Fig 6.b. It was
observed that the agent tried to move in the left direction.
The reason is that the agent of the policy network mainly
moved to the leftward and the upward direction, and the
agent is trained using the one-directional trajectories.

Fig 7 shows the result of learning the sub-goals in the test
environments without (top) and with (bottom) the reward
shaping for the shorter path. The agent was trained from the
sub-goals dedicated network using the trajectories, which
were collected from the agent of the policy network. In the

test environment, I set the sub-goals difﬁcultly, even though
all the points including the starting point and the target
point were set inversely. The agent successfully reached all
the sub-goals and the target points in the experiment, as
shown in Fig 7.a. That is, the agent was able to be fully
controlled by the sub-goals, in various scenarios. The agent
reached the sub-goals that had never been visited by the
agent of the policy network. Interestingly, in extremely hard
environments (round trip tasks), as shown in Fig 7.b, the
agent departed from the starting point and went through
the sub-goals, and then the agent turned halfway point and
came back to the starting point.

In addition, with the reward shaping for the shorter path,
the agent reached the target point faster than without the
reward shaping, as shown in Fig 7. With a visual inspection,
we can observe that the agent with the reward shaping
reached the sub-goals located diagonally with a shorter
distance from the current location. Moreover, the difference
between the number of steps to reach the target point with
and without the reward shaping was signiﬁcant.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

8

Fig. 8. The visualization of the path of the agent without and with the reward shaping for the shorter path in 20 scenarios. The number, located in
the upper of each ﬁgure, indicates the number of steps to reach the target point. The agent of the sub-goals dedicated network arrived at the target
point in all scenarios. With a visual inspection, the path of the agent with the reward shaping was shorter than without the reward shaping. In the
comparison of the number of steps, it can be seen that the agent with the reward shaping reaches the target point within a short time than the agent
without the reward shaping.

To strongly conﬁrm the performance difference between
without and with the reward shaping of the proposed
method, I additionally constructed 20 scenarios. Fig 8 shows
the route of the agent with and without the reward shaping
in each scenario. The number in each ﬁgure indicates the
number of steps to reach the target point. In all scenarios,
the agent went through the sub-goals and reached the
ﬁnal goal. It can be seen that the agent was able to be
fully under control by the sub-goals. Moreover, except for
three scenarios, the scenario 14, 15, and 16, the agent with
the reward shaping reached the target point much faster
in all scenarios. This characteristic was salient in complex
environments such as the scenario 1 and 2. The average
of the steps with the reward shaping was 338.25 and the
average of the steps without the reward shaping was 411.45.
It was conﬁrmed that the rewards shaping can shorten the
number of steps to arrive at the destination by 21.6.

4.4 Key-door domain

The agent of the (ASIL + RND) reached the ﬁnal stage
within 50,000 episodes only one time out of 10 trials in
the ‘key-door domain’ environment. It was a very difﬁcult
environment to clear. This was because of the condition to
clear each stage and the sparseness of the reward. I assumed
the two scenarios in the test environment. Two sub-goals
were imposed on the agent differently in each stage. The
bonus point and the goal point are also given as the sub-
goals. The agent was enforced to reach the sub-goals at ﬁrst
and after that, the agent was encouraged to reach the bonus
point and the target point.

Fig 9.a shows the visualization of the path of the agent,
success case of learning the desired policy. If the policy
network converges to the desired policy, the agent of the net-
work showed a clear path to the goal of Stage 4. However,
in the experiment, the agent of the policy network almost
failed to reach the ﬁnal stage in the training environment

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

9

Fig. 9. The visualization of the path of the agent in the key-door domain environment. a, The path of the agent of the policy network in each stage,
when the agent cleared all stages. The agent of the policy network cleared only one time out of 10 trials in total. b, The path of the agent of the
policy network in each stage, when the agent did not clear all stages. c ∼ d, The path of the agent of the sub-goals dedicated network, when the
sub-goals were given. The sub-goals dedicated network was used, when the agent of the policy network failed to clear all stages.

within 50,000 episodes. Fig 9.b shows the visualization of
the path of the agent, when the agent of the policy network
failed to learn the desired policy. The agent could reach
Stage 4, but the agent failed to clear the stage. In contrast, the
agent of the sub-goals dedicated network was able to reach
the goal in the ﬁnal stage, going through the sub-goals and
the bonus point in the two scenarios as shown in Fig 9.c ∼
d, even though the agent of the policy network failed, as
shown in Fig 9.b. This result means that learning the sub-
goals can improve the ability of the agent to reach the ﬁnal
goal, just like in previous studies. Unlike the previous study,
I set the mission for the agent’s performance to the sub-goals
dedicated network in order to apply in the path planning
problem, in which the ability to move in various directions is
necessary. Indeed, in the experiments, the last 300 episodes

of the policy network were enough to learn the sub-goals
dedicated network so that the agent could be under control.
We do not need to collect a number of trajectories to learn
the agent in the path planning, if we utilize the proposed
method.

However, the agent of the sub-goals dedicated network
did not show the shortest path whereas the agent of the pol-
icy network showed the almost shortest path. Furthermore,
like a previous study [21], sometimes, the agent that learned
the sub-goals was confused when the bonus point was near
the current location of the agent. The reason is that the agent
was trained to go through the bonus point, at ﬁrst, to clear
each stage. That is, the agent was enforced to move to the
sub-goals in learning the sub-goals, and the agent was also
encouraged to move to the bonus point and the target point.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

When the agent was near the bonus point, the agent could
get a larger reward, although the agent did not reach the
sub-goals. The agent was partially able to be controllable in
a complex environment with various variables that have a
great deal of inﬂuence on the agent. These remaining issues
call for further studies.

5 CONCLUSION

In this paper, I propose a novel RL framework within which
the agent can be under control in the path planning envi-
ronment so that the agent can reach various sub-goals. The
agent that completed the learning can perform the difﬁcult
missions such as a round trip, even the agent can reach an
unknown area. Therefore, the bi-directional memory editing
and the sub-goals dedicated network were presented on
the goal-conditioned RL. From the bi-directional memory
editing, we can obtain various sub-goals and behaviors of
the agent such that the agent can be more robust in the
test environment. In addition, using the sub-goals dedicated
network, the agent can perform several behaviors that are
directed by different sub-goals at one point. It was con-
ﬁrmed that the agent can be fully controlled and can achieve
various sub-goals that are customized by the users in the test
environment. Furthermore, the proposed reward shaping
for the shorter path can improve the ability of the path
planning.

However, in a complex environment with various vari-
ables such as the key-door domain, the agent was confused
about whether to select the sub-goals or the bonus point.
Although a fully controllable agent is useful in the path
planning, various variables such as an obstacle and the lim-
ited number of steps in an environmental setting should be
considered. Further, the reward shaping cannot guarantee
the optimal path. Future studies are required for a fully
controllable agent for the path planning. I expect that this
study would be applied and studied in a variety of domains
with a fully controllable agent in various scenarios.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

[1]

J. Yu, Y. Su, and Y. Liao, “The path planning of mobile robot by
neural networks and hierarchical reinforcement learning,” Fron-
tiers in Neurorobotics, p. 63, 2020.

[2] R. Kumar, L. Singh, and R. Tiwari, “Comparison of two meta–
heuristic algorithms for path planning in robotics,” in 2020 In-
ternational Conference on Contemporary Computing and Applications
(IC3A).
J. W ¨ohlke, F. Schmitt, and H. van Hoof, “Hierarchies of planning
and reinforcement learning for robot navigation,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 10 682–10 688.

IEEE, 2020, pp. 159–162.

[3]

[4] V. Jeauneau, L. Jouanneau, and A. Kotenkoff, “Path planner meth-
ods for uavs in real environment,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51,
no. 22, pp. 292–297, 2018.

[5] H. Qie, D. Shi, T. Shen, X. Xu, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Joint opti-
mization of multi-uav target assignment and path planning based
on multi-agent reinforcement learning,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp.
146 264–146 272, 2019.

[6] L. Wang, K. Wang, C. Pan, W. Xu, N. Aslam, and L. Hanzo, “Multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning-based trajectory planning for
multi-uav assisted mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 73–84,
2020.

10

[7] B. Wang, Z. Liu, Q. Li, and A. Prorok, “Mobile robot path planning
in dynamic environments through globally guided reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
6932–6939, 2020.
S. Hayat, E. Yanmaz, C. Bettstetter, and T. X. Brown, “Multi-
objective drone path planning for search and rescue with quality-
of-service requirements,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 44, no. 7, pp.
1183–1198, 2020.

[8]

[9] H. Bayerlein, M. Theile, M. Caccamo, and D. Gesbert, “Multi-uav
path planning for wireless data harvesting with deep reinforce-
ment learning,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society,
vol. 2, pp. 1171–1187, 2021.

[10] G. T. Lee and C. O. Kim, “Autonomous control of combat un-
manned aerial vehicles to evade surface-to-air missiles using deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 226 724–226 736,
2020.

[11] J. Hu, L. Wang, T. Hu, C. Guo, and Y. Wang, “Autonomous
maneuver decision making of dual-uav cooperative air combat
based on deep reinforcement learning,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 3,
p. 467, 2022.

[12] P. Wang, S. Gao, L. Li, B. Sun, and S. Cheng, “Obstacle avoidance
path planning design for autonomous driving vehicles based on
an improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld algorithm,” Energies, vol. 12,
no. 12, p. 2342, 2019.

[13] M. Tammvee and G. Anbarjafari, “Human activity recognition-
based path planning for autonomous vehicles,” Signal, Image and
Video Processing, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 809–816, 2021.

[14] Q. Yao, Z. Zheng, L. Qi, H. Yuan, X. Guo, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, and
T. Yang, “Path planning method with improved artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld—a reinforcement learning perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 135 513–135 523, 2020.

[15] Z. Qiao, Z. Tyree, P. Mudalige, J. Schneider, and J. M. Dolan, “Hi-
erarchical reinforcement learning method for autonomous vehicle
behavior planning,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 6084–6089.
[16] G. Lin, L. Zhu, J. Li, X. Zou, and Y. Tang, “Collision-free path
planning for a guava-harvesting robot based on recurrent deep
reinforcement learning,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
vol. 188, p. 106350, 2021.

[17] Z. Cao, S. Xu, H. Peng, D. Yang, and R. Zidek, “Conﬁdence-aware
reinforcement learning for self-driving cars,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2021.

[18] H. Li, Q. Zhang, and D. Zhao, “Deep reinforcement learning-based
automatic exploration for navigation in unknown environment,”
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 31,
no. 6, pp. 2064–2076, 2019.

[19] Y. Yang, M. A. Bevan, and B. Li, “Efﬁcient navigation of colloidal
robots in an unknown environment via deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” Advanced Intelligent Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 1900106, 2020.

[20] J. Hu, H. Niu, J. Carrasco, B. Lennox, and F. Arvin, “Voronoi-based
multi-robot autonomous exploration in unknown environments
via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 14 413–14 423, 2020.

[21] G. Lee, “Learning user-deﬁned sub-goals using memory editing

in reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00399, 2022.

[22] L. Lee, B. Eysenbach, R. R. Salakhutdinov, S. S. Gu, and C. Finn,
“Weakly-supervised reinforcement learning for controllable be-
havior,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33,
pp. 2661–2673, 2020.

[23] T. Okudo and S. Yamada, “Subgoal-based reward shaping to
improve efﬁciency in reinforcement learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 97 557–97 568, 2021.

[24] L. Zhang, G. Yang, and B. C. Stadie, “World model as a graph:
Learning latent landmarks for planning,” in International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 12 611–12 620.

[25] E. Chane-Sane, C. Schmid, and I. Laptev, “Goal-conditioned re-
inforcement learning with imagined subgoals,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 1430–1440.
[26] R. Yang, Y. Lu, W. Li, H. Sun, M. Fang, Y. Du, X. Li, L. Han, and
C. Zhang, “Rethinking goal-conditioned supervised learning and
its connection to ofﬂine rl,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04478, 2022.

[27] C. Bai, P. Liu, W. Zhao, and X. Tang, “Guided goal generation
for hindsight multi-goal reinforcement learning,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 359, pp. 353–367, 2019.

[28] R. Zhao, X. Sun, and V. Tresp, “Maximum entropy-regularized
multi-goal reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 7553–7562.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

11

[51] A. V. Nair, V. Pong, M. Dalal, S. Bahl, S. Lin, and S. Levine, “Visual
reinforcement learning with imagined goals,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.

[52] B. Eysenbach, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and S. Levine, “Search on
the replay buffer: Bridging planning and reinforcement learning,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[53] B. Eysenbach, R. Salakhutdinov, and S. Levine, “C-learning: Learn-
ing to achieve goals via recursive classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.08909, 2020.

[54] J. Kim, Y. Seo, and J. Shin, “Landmark-guided subgoal generation
in hierarchical reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021.

[55] O. Nachum, S. S. Gu, H. Lee, and S. Levine, “Data-efﬁcient
hierarchical reinforcement learning,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.

[56] N. G ¨urtler, D. B ¨uchler, and G. Martius, “Hierarchical reinforce-
ment learning with timed subgoals,” Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021.

[57] J. Oh, Y. Guo, S. Singh, and H. Lee, “Self-imitation learning,” in
PMLR, 2018, pp.

International Conference on Machine Learning.
3878–3887.

[58] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for deep
reinforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learn-
ing. PMLR, 2016, pp. 1928–1937.

[59] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
preprint

“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,”
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

arXiv

[60] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.

[61] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized

experience replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.

[62] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learn-
ing with double q-learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 30, no. 1, 2016.

[63] Y. Burda, H. Edwards, A. Storkey, and O. Klimov, “Exploration
by random network distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894,
2018.

GyeongTaek Lee received a Ph.D degree in
industrial engineering from Yonsei University,
South Korea, in 2022. He is a visiting researcher
in Department of Industrial and Systems Engi-
neering from Rutgers University, The State Uni-
versity of New Jersey, NJ, USA. His current re-
search interests include reinforcement learning
and manufacturing data science.

[29] D. M. Bernstein and E. F. Loftus, “How to tell if a particular
memory is true or false,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 370–374, 2009.

[30] D. L. Schacter, S. A. Guerin, and P. L. S. Jacques, “Memory
distortion: An adaptive perspective,” Trends in cognitive sciences,
vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 467–474, 2011.

[31] J. Fern´andez, “What are the beneﬁts of memory distortion?” 2015.
[32] E. A. Phelps and S. G. Hofmann, “Memory editing from science
ﬁction to clinical practice,” Nature, vol. 572, no. 7767, pp. 43–50,
2019.

[33] C. Yan and X. Xiang, “A path planning algorithm for uav based
on improved q-learning,” in 2018 2nd International Conference on
Robotics and Automation Sciences (ICRAS).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.

[34] J. Chen, M. Li, Z. Yuan, and Q. Gu, “An improved a* algorithm
for uav path planning problems,” in 2020 IEEE 4th Information
Technology, Networking, Electronic and Automation Control Conference
(ITNEC), vol. 1.

IEEE, 2020, pp. 958–962.
[35] H. Zhou, H.-L. Xiong, Y. Liu, N.-D. Tan, and L. Chen, “Trajectory
planning algorithm of uav based on system positioning accuracy
constraints,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 250, 2020.

[36] C. Huang and J. Fei, “Uav path planning based on particle swarm
optimization with global best path competition,” International Jour-
nal of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 32, no. 06, p.
1859008, 2018.

[37] J. Chen, H. Zhao, and L. Wang, “Three dimensional path planning
of uav based on adaptive particle swarm optimization algorithm,”
in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1846, no. 1.
IOP
Publishing, 2021, p. 012007.

[38] X. Wang, C. Huang, and F. Chen, “An improved particle swarm
optimization algorithm for unmanned aerial vehicle route plan-
ning,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2245, no. 1.
IOP
Publishing, 2022, p. 012013.

[39] V. Jamshidi, V. Nekoukar, and M. H. Refan, “Analysis of parallel
genetic algorithm and parallel particle swarm optimization algo-
rithm uav path planning on controller area network,” Journal of
Control, Automation and Electrical Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 129–
140, 2020.

[40] X. Lei, Z. Zhang, and P. Dong, “Dynamic path planning of
unknown environment based on deep reinforcement learning,”
Journal of Robotics, vol. 2018, 2018.

[41] X. Liu, D. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Cui, L. Chen, and S. Liu, “Novel best
path selection approach based on hybrid improved a* algorithm
and reinforcement learning,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 51, no. 12,
pp. 9015–9029, 2021.

[42] C. Yan, X. Xiang, and C. Wang, “Towards real-time path planning
through deep reinforcement learning for a uav in dynamic envi-
ronments,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 98, no. 2,
pp. 297–309, 2020.

[43] C. Chen, X.-Q. Chen, F. Ma, X.-J. Zeng, and J. Wang, “A
knowledge-free path planning approach for smart ships based
on reinforcement learning,” Ocean Engineering, vol. 189, p. 106299,
2019.

[44] S. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and Y. Du, “An autonomous path
planning model for unmanned ships based on deep reinforcement
learning,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 2, p. 426, 2020.

[45] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong,
P. Welinder, B. McGrew,
J. Tobin, O. Pieter Abbeel, and
W. Zaremba, “Hindsight experience replay,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.

[46] H. Nguyen, H. M. La, and M. Deans, “Hindsight experience replay
with experience ranking,” in 2019 Joint IEEE 9th International Con-
ference on Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-
EpiRob).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[47] M. Fang, T. Zhou, Y. Du, L. Han, and Z. Zhang, “Curriculum-
guided hindsight experience replay,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[48] Y. Lai, W. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, and M. Kuang, “Hindsight
planner,” in Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2020, pp. 690–698.
[49] S. Nasiriany, V. Pong, S. Lin, and S. Levine, “Planning with goal-
conditioned policies,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[50] D. Ghosh, A. Gupta, A. Reddy, J. Fu, C. Devin, B. Eysenbach,
and S. Levine, “Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06088, 2019.

