World of Computer Science and Information Technology Journal (WCSIT)  
ISSN: 2221-0741 
Vol. 4, No. 2, 18-25, 2014 

Software Agents Interaction Algorithms in Virtual 
Learning Environment 

Dr. Zahi A.M. Abu Sarhan 
Faculty of Information Technology: Software Engineering Department 
Applied Science Private University 
Amman, Jordan 

Abstract—  This  paper  highlights  the  multi-agent  learning  virtual  environment  and  agent's  communication  algorithms.  The 
researcher proposed three algorithms required software agent’s interaction in virtual learning information system environment. The 
first proposed  algorithm is agents interaction localization algorithm, the second one is the dynamic agents  distribution  algorithm 
(load  distribution  algorithm),  and  the  third  model  is  Agent  communication  algorithm  based  on  using  agents  intermediaries.  The 
main objectives of these algorithms are to reduce the response time for any agents’ changes in virtual learning environment (VLE) 
by increasing the information exchange intensity between software agents and reduce the overall network load, and to improve the 
communication between  mobile agents in distributed information  system  to  support  effectiveness.  Finally  the  paper describe the 
algorithms of information exchange between mobile agents in VLE based on the expansion of the address structure and the use of 
an agent, intermediary agents, matchmaking agents ,brokers and their entrepreneurial functions.  

Keywords- multi-agent system; agent interaction models; Intermediary Agents; Virtual Learning Environment; Brokering Agents; 
Matchmaking Agents. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

At  present,  most  of  information  system  in  various  fields 
based  on  software  agents  technology,  these  systems  can 
implemented as distributed information systems as centralized 
information  systems,  and  one  of  these  complex  systems  is 
distance  or  electronic  learning  systems.  For  the  e-learning 
systems  wildly  used  centralized  technology  development  and 
information  systems  operation.  The  situation  is  still  likes  the 
90's  of  the  last  century,  when  there  were  a  large  number  of 
scattered,  technically  and  semantically  mixed  databases,  used 
locally.  Different  kinds  of  attempts  to  create  a  central  system 
for  utilization  all  information  system  resources  to  achieve 
valuable functionality and flexibility have yielded little success. 
The  wildly  used  today's  Internet  technologies  and  software 
agents  techniques  with  web  access,  solves  the  problem 
partially.  In  this  way,  there  is  a  distributed  access  to 
information  and  the  information  resources  and  by  the  way  it 
keeps  it  to  be  centralized,  which  makes  them  not  always 
sufficiently  relevant,  high  redundancy,  technological,  and 
semantic diversity [1]. 

In this context, it is urgent the task to think about creating a 
fully  decentralized  peer  information  systems  to  support  e-
learning  process,  enabling  flexible  integration  into  virtual  and 
logical  platform  intelligently  accomplish  requested  task  and 

usefully  invoking  all  available  information  resources,  thus 
creating  a  unified  virtual  learning  platform  for  fully  efficient 
interaction  of  all  learning  subjects.  Effective  technology  for 
implementation distributed information systems of this class is 
the  mobile  software  agents’  technology  [1,  2].  These  systems 
must  not  only  distribute  access  to  information,  but  also 
decentralized  data  storage  and  processing,  and  solving 
problems related with information resources semantic diversity.  

The  developed  multi-agent  system  implements  a  virtual 
learning  environment  (VLE), in  which  real  learning processes 
related  with  development  and 
implementation  of  all 
comprehensive forms of academic technological innovation in 
learning  and  education  and  any  comprehensive  ideas  that  can 
be  implemented  as  relevant  information  processes[4].  The 
subjects  of  learning  can  be  presented  as  software  agents  that 
interact  with  each  other  in  a  single  VLE  and  perform  the 
interest of its owners, forming an open multi-agent system with 
a decentralized architecture. 

Software agent is computer system, which is found in some 
environment  and  is  capable  of  autonomous  action  in  this 
environment in order to meet its design objectives [4]. Software 
agents have characteristics that make them suitable for complex 
functions.  Such  features 
interaction, 
reactivity, activity, intelligence and mobility [5, 6].  

include:  autonomy, 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

minimizing  the  data  losses  possibility  and  the  transmitting 
messages between agents delay time. The proposed solution in 
this paper based on the expansion of the agent address structure 
and  the  information  about  its  current  location  in  the  network 
and local caching this information on the system  hosts, which 
will allow sending messages directly from the  sender agent to 
the  recipient  agent,  as  well  as  provide  the  ability  to  search 
agents with the joint action through intermediary agents, using 
their  brokering  services  [11]  and  matchmaking  services  [12] 
functions.  Algorithm  searching  agents’  initiators  executed  in 
the agents intermediaries address space. 

III.  MULTI-AGENT VIRTUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 

The  modern  virtual  learning  environment  (VLE)  is  a 
software  system  designed  to  support  teaching  and  learning. 
VLEs  generally  function  on  the  World  Wide  Web,  and, 
therefore,  they  can  be  utilized  both  on  and  off-campus, 
provided  that  the  users  are  authorized  and  can  access  the 
Internet  [12].  This  surmount  over  the  restriction  of  traditional 
face-to-face  learning,  and  guarantees  that  learning  is  neither 
limited  to  location  nor  time.  VLEs  can  contains  complex  of 
interactions  between  teachers,  learners  and  learning  contents, 
by  adding  agents  and  environment  to  this  structure,  the  VLE 
can be presented as a complex of agents interaction and every 
learning  structure 
interest  of 
agent  represents 
components,  such  as  learner  agent,  teacher  agent,  content 
agent,  and  every  agent 
to 
accomplish  requested  task.  However  the  set  of  interacted 
agents can contain “learner –learner interaction agent, learner-
teacher  interaction  agent,  learner-content  interaction  agent, 
teacher-teacher  interaction  agent,  teacher-content  interaction 
agent,  content-content  interaction  agent,  learner-environment 
interaction  agent, 
interaction  agent, 
teacher-environment 
content-environment  interaction  agent”,  VLEs  become  more 
popular and included in many college organizations all over the 
world.  It  is  not  only  because  of  their  versatility,  but  also 
because  they  provide  an  extensive  range  of  tools  or  features, 
such as content distribution, evaluation, emails[14, 15]. 

interacts  with  other  agents 

the 

the 

Based  on 

the 
representation of VLE can be presented as a set of agents that 
interact together, shown in figure 1. 

learning  process 

components 

the 

in 

This paper presents the software  agents interaction models 
and the algorithms for learning activities in the virtual learning 
information  systems  environment,  enabling  faster  response  to 
changes 
the  agents  virtual  environment  simulating 
innovative  field  by  increasing  the  intensity  of  information 
exchange between the agents and to reduce the overall load on 
the network. Indicating ways to enhance the interaction among 
mobile  agents  in  an  apportioned  multi-agent  system  of 
information to back up learners and teachers action. 

II.  PROBLEM STATEMENT 

Multi-agent  systems  (MAS)  technology  -  a  new  pattern of 
information  technology,  focused  on  the  sharing  of  scientific 
and  technological  achievements  and  benefits  which  provide 
ideas  and  methods  of  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  the  current 
local and global computer networks, distributed databases and 
distributed computing, hardware and software tools to support 
the theory of distribution and transparency. 

Relevance  of distributed  AI  and MAS,  in  accordance  with 
the    works [7,  9],  determined  by  the  complexity  of  diversity 
modern organizational and technical systems, complexity, and 
tasks  distributions,  large  volumes  of  Information  flow  and 
information  processing 
is 
widely  used  in  various  fields  that  required  solutions  for 
complex distributed tasks such as combined product design, re-
engineering  information  processes  and  the  construction  of 
virtual systems, and e-commerce systems, distributed computer 
programs development. 

time. Agent-oriented  approach 

The  greatest  complexity  in  the  theoretical  studies  and 
practical  modern  MAS  implementations  are  issues  related  to 
the  agents’  interaction  processes  in  the  collective  solving 
problems with high practical complexity and relevance, as each 
agent solves specific subtask, has only a partial idea about the 
general  task  and  should  continuously  interact  with  other 
agents. Therefore,  at  present  the  most  relevant  in  the  MAS 
theory  and  technology  is  the  issues  related  with  creating 
intelligent agents interaction models in the MAS. 

In inter-host software agents interaction in a virtual learning 
environment,  arise  a  set  of  issues  related  with  increasing  the 
network load, and reducing the information exchange intensity 
between agents which depends on the speed and bandwidth of 
the  network  connections.  Increasing  the  request  delivery  time 
and the needs time to find the correct agent for interaction. As a 
suitable solution for these problems, proposed a method based 
on  the  decomposition  a  common  information  space  in  which 
agents  operate  in  virtual  platform  (platform  represents  some 
separate network host) and move intensively interacting agents 
to  these  platforms  in  order  to  combining  agents  in  coalition. 
The  proposed  solution  can  be  implemented  in  two  mutually 
complementary  algorithms  software  agents’  interaction:  the 
interaction 
algorithm 
(Transformation the  inter-host  agent’s  interaction  to  intra-host 
interaction) and software agent’s dynamic allocation algorithm 
(balancing load between system hosts) [10]. 

inter-host 

software 

agent’s 

of 

However,  the  architecture  design  of  decentralized  open 
information  systems,  arise  problem  related  with  determining 
the location of dynamically distributed mobile agents, that are 
time,  as  well  as 
moving  between  network  hosts  over 

Figure 1.   Virtual learning environment based on multi-agents architecture.  

19 

Learner-Content Interaction AgentTecher-Content Interaction AgentLearner-Learner Interaction agentLearner-Teacher Interaction AgentTeacher-Teacher Interaction agentContent-Content Interaction agent 
WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

IV.  AGENTS COMMUNICATION MODEL 

the 

direct 

following 

interaction 

and  moderating 

Agents  Communication  Model  in  an  open  multi-agent 
information system that supports e-learning process, according 
to the work [14], can be classified by the interaction character 
(point-to-point 
in 
categories: 
communication), 
(throw 
intermediaries  or  server  agents)  interaction.  In  point  to  point 
agents’ model communication message delivered directly from 
agent sender to the agent receiver, even if the agent receiver is 
a  mobile  agent  (a  message  can  be  sent  through  a  set  of 
computer  network  host’s).  In  the  intermediary  agent  model 
communication  mainly  uses  agents  brokering  services  or 
matchmaking  services  agent’s  intermediaries,  which  allow 
agents  to  communicate  with  each  other,  this  model  provides 
multipoint and anonymous agent’s interaction. These two types 
of services have their advantages and disadvantages: brokering 
services  are  more  efficient,  while  matchmaking  services  are 
more flexible [10]. 

Depending  on  the  agent-receiver  location  in  the  network 
agent’s communication model, according to [6, 9], may be also 
classified  as  follows:  inter-host  communication  and  intra-host 
communication.  When  the  agent-sender  and  agent-receiver 
located  on  the  same  network  host,  the  messages  transmission 
between  these  both  agents  called  intra-host  communication. 
When  they  were  located  on  two  different  network  hosts,  the 
messages  transmission  between  agents  delivered  via  the 
network nods, and this type of communication called the inter-
host communication. Even if the  Internet data rate has greatly 
increased,  inter-host  agent’s  communication  still  would  take 
greater  time  than  interaction  with  intra-host  communication. 
Therefore, 
inter-host 
communication  to  intra-host  communication,  which  would 
reduce  the  time  required  for  messages  transmission  and 
increase the interaction intensity in the agent’s communication 
process. 

to  reform  agent’s 

is  advisable 

it 

The  main  disadvantages  of  presented  agent’s  interaction 

models can be listed as follows: 

– At inter-host interaction: the network over load  increases, 
and the information exchange intensity between agents reduced 
due  to  increasing  message  delivery  times,  agents  reaction  for 
dynamically changing events of environment or the absence of 
any  response  to  change  the  environment  in  message  losing 
case; 

– At the agents’ migration between system hosts there was 
a problem of the needed responder agent location determining 
for  interaction  during  any  time  moment,  which  in  its  turn 
results  to  increasing  in  messages  loss  probability  during  their 
transfer and reducing the effectiveness of synchronized agent’s 
interaction. 

V.  AGENT-BASED ALGORITHMS VIRTUAL LEARNING  
PLATFORMS FORMATION 

The  higher  effect  obtained  from  using  the  virtual  learning 
environment (VLE), based on the biggest of its internal volume 
(the  number  of  registered  requests),  Agents  representing  the 
Learning  subjects  interests,  and  placement  of  information 
databases  hosts  [17].  However,  the  naturally  growth  of  the 

20 

system  volume  leads  to  increase  the  information  elements 
search task complexity, and the selection of learning structures 
options  due  polynomial  growth  of  alternatives  quantity.  In 
order that the system no longer runs under its own unrestricted 
growth,  needed  some  self-organization  algorithms,  allowing 
dynamically  reorganize  its  internal  structure  to  reduce  the 
amount  of  processed  and  transmitted  over  the  communication 
lines data during the learning offerings placement and retrieval 
on the media hubs, and  forming a potentially effective learning 
structures.  

Self-organization  is  the  automatic  generation  within-VLE 
virtual  learning  platforms  (VLP),  combining  agents  with 
similar interests in groups. Formation the VLP based on a the 
register distribution support method  for peer-to-peer hosts with 
the implicit treelike organization [9] in which as an organizing 
structure  tree  uses  the  hierarchical  learning  domain  model. 
Learning  platforms  formation  carried  out  by  displaying  the 
agent’s  purposes  on  the  treelike  conceptual  domain  model, 
Subsequent  localization  the  main  part  of  search  and  other 
agents  requests  inside  the  group  and  further  analysis  the 
interests 
communications  activity  with  each  other.  The 
similarity leads to the fact that the most active and informative 
agents  communication  focused 
learning  platform, 
whereas  outside  platform  the  information  exchange  is  less 
active,  thus  an  exchange  object  generalized  (smaller  by 
volume) agents learning offers or requests [18]. 

inside 

to 

in 

the 

reducing 

inter-host 

This  approach  allows  not  only 

total 
communication amount between agents, but also due to the use 
intra-host 
transform 
of  mobile  agents 
communication. This, in turn, reduces the network load in case 
of  the  distributed  system  implementation.  The  main  agent 
based algorithms that enhance e-leaning systems efficiency are 
agent  interactions  localization  algorithm  within  hosts  by 
forming groups actively communicates agents (virtual learning 
platforms)  and  dynamic 
load  redistribution  by 
transfer 
implementing  agents  group  migration  algorithm.  These 
algorithms provide ultimately, the conversion agents inter host 
interactions  in  intra-host.  In  order  to  convert  the  inter-host 
interactions in intra host interactions, the system agents   can be 
distributed  the  network  hosts  depending  on  their  interaction 
nature and behavior. Since the agents interaction nature can be 
continuously  changed,  the  agents  distribution  on  the  network 
hosts should be dynamic. In this case, the agents automatically 
distributed  on  multiple  network  hosts,  depending  on  their 
interaction  nature,  some  hosts  may  be  overwhelmed  by  the 
several  migrating  agents  to  them.  Therefore,  the  proposed 
agents  dynamic  distribution  algorithm,  that  based  on  their 
interaction  behavior  should  be  complemented  by  another 
agents  distribution  algorithm  which  support  uniform  load 
distribution between network hosts. 

In the proposed multi-agent system [7], each host equipped 
with an agent-based platform (agent representative), which is a 
agents  local  execution  environment,  in  which  software  agents 
operate  and  interact  with  each  other.  Implemented  agents 
interaction  algorithms  involve  a  sequence  of  similar  operating 
phases  and  use  common  components  that  are  present  on  each 
agent platform. 

WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

To  arrange  a  dynamic  agents  distribution  on  each  agent 
system platform the following components should operate. The 
Message Manager (MM), coordinating the messages exchange 
between  the  system  agents;  and  the  System  Monitor  (SM), 
periodically checking the load on the current network host; and 
the Agent Distribution Manager (ADM), is responsible for the 
agents dynamic distribution and analysis the models of agents 
interaction  behavior  and  character;  and  finally  the  Agent 
Migration  Manager  (AMM),  displacing  agents  on  other 
platforms  (hosts)  and  managing  agents  migration  between 
network hosts. 

A.  Agents interaction Localization algorithm  

The  agent’s  interaction  localization  algorithm  will  contain 

four phases as shown in figure 2. 

  Analysis  phase.  The  Agent’s  Distribution  Manager 
(ADM)  evaluates  inter-host  and  intra-host  system 
agents’  communications  intensity,  involving  in  this 
stage  system  monitor  and  messages  manager.  ADM 
also  uses  all  information  as  about  agent-sender,  as 
about agent-receiver host. ADM periodically evaluates 

communication 

dependency 

 at 

time 

 between  the  agent 

 and  agents  host 

 as follows: 

       (1) 

Where  

 - the number of messages sent by the agent 

 to  host 

 agents  over  the  time  period

 -  is  the 
coefficient, which characterizes the relative dependency of new 
information  in  relation  to  the  outdated  (expired)  and  used  to 
ignore  the  temporary  intensive  interaction  with  the  agents  in 

, 

particular  agent  platform; 

 -  is  defined  as  the  value 

of  the  same  communication  dependency  in  the  previous  time 
interval. 

stage 

  Agents Distribution Phase. After a specified number of 
analysis 
the 
communication  dependency  coefficient  between  the 
current host agent n and all other  hosts in the system. 
 between 
Communication  dependency  coefficient 

repetitions  ADM  calculates 

agent  and  host 

agents can be  given by: 

 (2) 

When 

the  communication 
the  maximum  value  of 
dependency  coefficient  over  a  predefined  edge
,  ADM 
current  host includes under consideration the agent in a group 
of agents, located on a remote system host: 

    (3) 

Where 

is an agent 

, 

 indicates the agents group 

, 

and  under 

 hereinafter  understood  operation  that  returns 

the value of 

, where the ratio of communication dependence 

coefficient 

 takes the maximum value. 

 

Interaction  Phase.  Before  moving  the  selected  agents 
 ADM 
group  from  the  host 

to  the  receiver  host 

 interacts with ADM host 

host 
checks 
the current memory host state, CPU utilization, and the 

. ADM 

Figure 2.   Agent’s interaction localization algorithm  

21 

ADM Host P1StartEvaluate inter-host and intra-host communications intensityCollect Information about Agent Sender And Agent Receiver HostEvaluate communication dependency Done?NoYesADM Host P1System MonitorMessage Manager Add Agent I to group G YesNoADM P1 Requests available recourses on Host P2 Calculate the communication dependency coefficient ADM Host P2Enough recourses on Host P2?ADM P2 permits migrationYesNoMigrate Agents group to host P2 EndADM Host P1Analysis PhaseDistribution phaseInteraction phaseMigration phaseijDt12,tTttij()()()ijijijikkR(t)Dt=+1-Dt-1R(t)ddæö÷ç÷ç÷ç÷ç÷ç÷ç÷÷çèøåijDtij12,ttTijDt-1ijMij,ijijinDMjnDargmaxjijikikBMMGiikGkargjjijM1P2P1P2P2P 
 
 
 
 
 
WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

number of agents  hosted in this  host, by using system 
 has  enough  free  system 
monitor.  If  the  host 

between  the  agents  and  the  locally  formed  agents  groups  on 
different network hosts [10]. 

resources  for  new  agents,  ADM  host 

   authorizes 

Communication  dependence  of 

between  agent 

the agents group migration from host 

to host 

. 

  Agents’  Migration  Phase.  Accomplishing  the  agents’ 
selection operation for migration and receiving positive 
response  from  ADM  receiver  host,  the  sender  host 
ADM jointly with Agents Migration Manager (AMM) 
initiates  the  selected  agents’  group  migration  to  the 
receiver host. 

Agents’  interaction  localization  algorithm  assumes  the 
analysis  of  dynamic  changes  in  interaction  patterns  (models) 
between agents, but this algorithm can overloaded some system 
hosts due to the large number of agents which can be moved to 
the hosts. 

When a host is overloaded, the system monitor detects this 
state  and  activates  the  agents’  redistribution  process,  which  is 
not only based on individual agent movement between network 
hosts,  but  the  whole  interacting  agents  group  intensively 
interacts with each other.  

B.  The agents dynamic distribution algorithm  

The 

agents  dynamic  distribution 

(load 
distribution  algorithm)  among  system  hosts  consists  five 
phases:  Analysis  phase  agents  grouping  phase,  agent  groups 
distribution  phase,  agents  interaction  phase  and  the  agents 
migration phase.  

algorithm 

  Analysis Phase. Each system host monitor periodically 
checks  the  agent  platform  state  in  which  agents 
interacting on this host. And by calling special system 
functions  collects  information  about  the  host  physical 
resources such as (current CPU load and free memory 
space). When the system monitor defines that the  host 
is  overloaded,  it  will  activate  the  agents’  distribution 
procedure  between  system  hosts.  As  a  host  overload 
criterion  can  be  offered  the  maximum  number  of 
agents operated on the host.  

When  ADM  gets  notification  about  congestion  from  the 
system  monitor,  it  starts  the  local  agents  interaction  monitor 
procedure,  preliminary  in  order  to  locally  splitting  interacted 
and cooperated agents into groups.  

The  group  formed  from  agents  that  have  most  similar 
interests  and  goals,  which  are  intensively,  interact  with  each 
other  by  exchanging  messages.  Information  about  agents  and 
agents groups registered in the special register. The information 
analysis provided on the register, allows to evaluate the load on 
the  system  hosts  and  determine  the  intensity  between  agents 
and intergroup and inter-host communication levels, which, in 
turn, allows to select loaded and unloaded hosts in the system, 
and  implement  the  dynamic  agents  redistribution  and  agents 
groups  among  the  system  hosts,  in  other  words  the  agents  or 
agents  groups  movement  with  certain  characteristics  from 
overloaded hosts to less loaded hosts in the system, containing 
similar  potential  agents  interests.  After  a  predetermining  the 
time  interval  ADM  updates  communication  dependences 

22 

and agents group 
formula: 

 at the moment 

 can be determined by the 

    (4) 

Where 

 -  is  the  number  of  messages  sent  by  the 

agent 

 to the agents group 

- over the time  period 

, 

 -  is  the  coefficient,  which  characterizes  the  relative 
importance  of  new  information  in  relation  to  the  outdated 

(expired)  and  used.  In  this  case  the  expression 

shows  the  number  of  messages  sent  by  agent 
jointly functioning on the common host. 

 to  any  agent 

  Agents Grouping Phase. After accomplishing a number 
 agent  is 

of  monitoring  phases  repetitions  each 

overridden  in  local  agents  group  with  new  index 
and given by: 

               (5) 

Where 

 indicates 

- local group agents. 

Monitoring and agents grouping phases are repeated several 
times.  After  each  agents  grouping  phase  information  about 
local communication dependencies between agents zeroed. 

  Agent  Groups  Distribution  Phase.  After  performing  a 
certain  number  repetitions  of  monitoring  and  agents 
grouping  phases,  ADM  depending  on  agent  platform 
status  takes  the  decision  to  move  the  agents  group  to 
other system host. The selection of moved agents based 
on  the  communication  dependence  between  agent 
groups and the system hosts. 

 Communication Dependence 

 between 

- agents group 

and  the 
 system  host  based  on  the  summation  of  the 
communication  dependence  between  all  members  of  agents 
group and the system host: 

                                  (6) 

Where 

-  all  agents  indexes  set,  belonging  to 

-  agents 

group,  and 

 -  communication  dependence  between 

agent 

 and 

 system  host  in  the  current  time 

.  The  agents 

group 
host  and can be selected by the following rule: 

,  which  have  a  smallest  dependence  on  the  current 

2P2P1P2PijDtijt11ijijijiKKRtDtDtRtijDtij12,ttTiKKRtii*j** jijijjargmaxMtA*jA*jijWijiijkjkAWtCtiAikjCtkjt*i 
 
 
WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

(7) 

Where 

 is the current host (Agent platform) number [10]. 

The  receiving  agent  platform 

,  selected  by 

 agents 

group determined using communication dependence between 

agents group and 

  system host as follows: 

       (8) 

Where 

 is the current host (Agent platform) number. 

interaction  with 

  Agents Interaction Phase. When in the network defined 
the  receiving  host  for  agent  groups,  the  sender  host 
ADM  begins 
the  corresponding 
receiving  host  ADM.  If  the  receiving  ADM  allows 
agents movement, sending host ADM starts the agents 
migrating  phase.  Otherwise,  the  sending  host  ADM 
polls  other  system  hosts  ADM  as  long  as  it  finds  a 
suitable  host  for  a  scheduled  agents  migration 
(movement).  If  no  host  is  unable  to  take  the  agents 
group,  the  interaction  phase  fails  and  after  a  certain 
time  period 
(allocation) 
the  agents  distribution 
algorithm on the sending host restarted, and the process 
repeats again. 

Agents  interaction phase of this algorithm is similar to the 
agents  interaction  localization  algorithm.  Yet,  the  interaction 
level  between  these  two  algorithms  is  very  different:  agents’ 
interaction  localization  algorithm  occurs  at  the  agent  level, 
whereas  the  algorithm  load  distribution  between  the  system 
hosts  implemented  at  the  agent  groups  level.  If  the  agent 
receiver-platform 
system 
representation  has 
resources  for  all  agents  belong  to  the  selected  local  agents 
group,  ADM  agent  receiver-platform  representation  may 
authorize  the  agents’  group  movement.  Otherwise,  the  system 
receiver  host  rejects  the  request  to  move  the  selected  agents 
group; the host is unable to accept only part of agents group. 

sufficient 

  Agents  Migration  Phase.  When  ADM  sender  host 
receives a response with acceptance to move the agents 
group  from  ADM  receiver  host,  ADM  sender  host 
initiates  migration  the  selected  local  agents  group  to 
the receiver host. 

Each agent-based representation independently performs its 
own  agents  distribution  algorithm  in  accordance  with  the 
available information about the load on the system host, where 
it is located, and the agents interaction character functioning in 
agents  platform  [10].  The  agents  dynamic  distribution 
algorithm shown in figure 3. 

Figure 3.   Agent’s dynamic distribution algorithm  

C.  Agent communication model based on using agents 

intermediary 
In  open  multi-agent  systems  with  extremely  dynamic 
character (in any time may come in or/and go out new agents, 

23 

*,ijijjninWiargmaxWn*jii*j* , jijjargmaxWjnnADM sender HostStartEvaluate agents platform stateCollect Information about Host physical resourcesIs the host overloaded?NoYesSystem MonitorADM sender Requests migration validation from ADM receiver Host Valid response?Request migration validation from another ADM Host YesNoMigrate Agents group to selected host EndADM receiver HostActivate Agents distribution procedureLocally split interacted and cooperated agents into groupsUpdate communication dependency Done?NoYesADMADMCreate local Agents group Get communication dependency equals to zeroCalculate the communication dependenceSelect Agent receiving hostSelect Agent Group For movmentAnalysis PhaseDistribution phaseInteraction phaseMigration phaseGrouping phase             
 
 
 
WCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

and be  connect  new hosts), each individual agent cannot have 
full information about all other agents in the same information 
and  communication  environment.  In  this  environment,  a  joint 
operation of network services agents intermediaries (brokerage 
and  matchmaking  services)  are  highly  effective  in  finding 
potential  agents  for  interaction  [19,  22].  Software  agents  can 
find  the  other  agents  names  using  matchmaking  services  or 
send  messages  to  other agents  using  brokering  services,  using 
their attributes, such as methods, operation modes,  features or 
nicknames  instead  of  their  real  names.  To  register  the  agents 
names  in distributed  virtual  learning  environment  can  be  used 
the  dedicated  server  for  agents’  names.  Agent  Intermediary 
functions 
its 
architecture,  or  they  can  be  implemented  as  an  independent 
specialized application called agents intermediaries [24]. 

implemented  as  a  separate  component 

in 

algorithms  provided  by  agents’  initiators.  This  is  the  main 
difference between the proposed method of using intermediary 
agents and their features compared to the existing ones.  

VI.  CONCLUSION 

This  paper  discusses  separated  agent-based  algorithms  for 
Virtual  learning  environment  information  system  effective 
functioning  and  distributed  hosts 
interaction  algorithms. 
Described  various 
implementation  approaches  of  agents 
communication  algorithms.  Analyzed  the  existent  software 
agents  communication  models.  Identified  weaknesses  of these 
models,  based  on  that  proposed  approaches  to  improve  the 
mobile  agents  cooperation  in  distributed  Virtual  learning 
environments. 

Interaction mediating between the agents includes brokers’ 
agents or matchmakers’ agents. Brokers forward the messages 
given by the agent sender to the network hosts where the agent 
receiver  located,  whereas  matchmakers’  only  provides  the 
agents  intending  to  send  messages,  all  information  about  the 
agent  receiver  location,  in  other  words  the  final  message  was 
delivered to the agent receiver brokers, while the matchmakers 
only  help  sender  agents  to  deliver  messages  to  the  agent 
receiver,  providing 
locations. 
Considering the number of steps within transmitting massages, 
it  can  be  concluded  that  the  brokerage  services  are  more 
effective than matchmakers, since brokerage services typically 
require  two  steps  to  transmit  massage,  while  matchmakers 
requires three steps. 

information  about 

their 

Using  shared  memory  area,  that  called  data  fragments 
space,  which  controlled  by  intermediary  agents,  agents  can 
register their attributes together with the names in this area, and 
they  can  communicate  each  other  by  using  the  attributes 
information  about  other  agents,  this  information  can  be 
extracted  from  this  area.  The  basis  of  most  developed 
intermediary  agents  is  Linda-model  [9,  10].  The  proposed 
model presented in figure 4.  

Figure 4. Agent communication  model based on using agents intermediary 

The  model  allows  software  agents  to  use  intermediary 
agents, and the provided services by them to search agents with 
the  similar  interests  and  provides  the  basis  method  of  using 
intermediary  agents  and  their  functions.  The  intermediaries 
agents  don’t  only  control  the  data  fragments,  but  can  be  also 
used  as  own  agents  search  algorithms  “joint  activity”  and 

24 

Based  on  the  modification  of  existing  agents  interaction 
models, developed algorithms for data exchange among mobile 
software  agents 
the  agents  efficiency  for 
distributed data processing and reduce the total transmitted data 
amount over the network: 

increase 

that 

  Agent  communication  algorithm  based  on  the  using 

agents brokers and their functions; 

in  virtual 

information 

system  activities 

However, developed software agents interaction algorithms 
learning 
for 
environments, 
that  allowing  faster  agents  response  for 
environment  changes  in  which  an  agent  functioning,  by 
increasing  information  exchange  intensity  between  agents  and 
reduce  the  overall  load  on  the  network,  those  algorithms  are 
Agents  interaction  localization  algorithm  transformation  inter-
host  communication  to  interact  as  intra-host  communication; 
and  agents  dynamic  distribution  algorithm  (balancing  load 
between the system hosts). 

Based on developed software agents interaction models and 
algorithms, proposed the minimizing inter-host communication 
in problem-oriented distributed systems method. The method is 
based  on  software  agents  classification  in  semantic  space, 
presented  as  conceptual  domain  model,  and  agents  inter-host 
communication  transformation  in  intra-host.  Implementation 
this  method  provides  a 
in  communication 
infrastructure  load  and  improving  availability  coefficient  for 
software agents application services. 

reduction 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The  author  is  grateful  to  the  Applied  Science  Private 
University, Amman, Jordan, for the financial support granted to 
cover the publication fee of this research article 

REFERENCES 

[1]  А.  Маслобоев,  Мультиагентная 

технология  формирования 
едином  информационно-
виртуальных  бизнес-площадок 
коммуникационном  пространстве  развития  инноваций,  Publisher, 
City, 2009. 

в 

[2] B.M. Balachandran, M. Enkhsaikhan, Developing multi-agent e-commerce 
applications with JADE, in:  Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information 
and Engineering Systems, Springer, 2007, pp. 941-949. 

[3]  D.  Tavangarian,  M.E.  Leypold,  K.  Nölting,  M.  Röser,  D.  Voigt,  Is  e-

learning the Solution for Individual Learning, Publisher, City, 2004. 

Massages QueueMsg 1Msg 2Msg nData Fragments AreaTasks QueueTask 1Task 2Task n……MatchmakersData Fragment ManagerBrokersORWCSIT 4 (2), 18 -25, 2014 

[4]  T.  Erl,  A.  Karmarkar,  P.  Walmsley,  H.  Haas,  L.U.  Yalcinalp,  K.  Liu,  D. 
Orchard, A. Tost, J. Pasley, Web service contract design and versioning 
for SOA, Prentice Hall, 2009. 

[5  F.P.  Brooks  Jr,  The  design  of  design:  Essays  from  a  computer  scientist, 

Pearson Education, 2010. 

[6]  E.  Platon,  N.  Sabouret,  S.  Honiden,  Tag  Interactions  in  MultiAgent 

Systems: Environment Support, Publisher, City, 2005. 

[7] S. Alouf, F. Huet, P. Nain, Forwarders vs. centralized server: an evaluation 

of two approaches for locating mobile agents, Publisher, City, 2002. 

[8] N. Carriero, D. Gelernter, Linda in context, Publisher, City, 1989. 
[9] B. Chen, H.H. Cheng, J. Palen, Integrating mobile agent technology with 
multi-agent  systems  for  distributed  traffic  detection  and  management 
systems, Publisher, City, 2009. 

[10] А.В. Маслобоев, Модели и алгоритмы взаимодействия программных 
агентов в виртуальной бизнес-среде развития инноваций, Publisher, 
City, 2009. 

[11] K. Malik, Use of knowledge brokering services in the innovation process, 
in:    Management  of  Innovation  and  Technology  (ICMIT),  2012  IEEE 
International Conference on, IEEE, 2012, pp. 273-278. 

[12] T.A. Farrag, A.I. Saleh, H.A. Ali, Semantic web services matchmaking: 

Semantic distance-based approach, Publisher, City, 2013. 

[13]  Z.  Xu,  Z.  Yin,  A.  El  Saddik,  A  Web  Services  Oriented  Framework  for 

Dynamic E-Learning Systems, Publisher, City. 

[14]  A.  Targamadze,  R.  Petrauskiene,  Classification  of  distance  learning 

agents, Publisher, City, 2010. 

[15]  E.M.  Van  Raaij,  J.J.  Schepers,  The  acceptance  and  use  of  a  virtual 

learning environment in China, Publisher, City, 2008. 

[16] A. Di Stefano, C. Santoro, Locating mobile agents in a wide distributed 

environment, Publisher, City, 2002. 

 [17]  W.F.  McComas,  Virtual  Learning  Environment,  in:    The  Language  of 

Science Education, Springer, 2014, pp. 110-110. 

[18] E. Sangineto, An Adaptive E-Learning Platform for Personalized Course 

Generation, Publisher, City, 2008. 

[19]  S.L.  Greenspan,  E.  Hadar,  Using  cloud  brokering  services  for  an 

opportunistic cloud offering, in, Google Patents, 2013. 

[20]  S.  Muthaiyah,  L.  Kerschberg,  Brokering  Web  Services  via  a  Hybrid 
Ontology  Mediation  Approach  Using  Multi  Agent  Systems  (MAS), 
Publisher, City, 2010. 

[21]  P.  Khanna,  B.  Babu,  Cloud  Computing  Brokering  Service:  A  Trust 
Framework, in:  CLOUD COMPUTING 2012, The Third International 
Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, 2012, pp. 
206-212. 

[22]  J.-b.  LI,  C.-h.  LI,  Research  on  the  Development  of  the  Cooperation 
among  Governments,  Enterprises,  Universities,  Research  Institutes, 
Financial Units and Intermediary Agents [J], Publisher, City, 2010. 

AUTHORS PROFILE 

Dr.  Zahi  A.  M.  Abu  Sarhan  Received  the 
M.S. and PhD degrees in Computerized 
and 
Control  Automated  Systems 
Progressive  Information  Technologies 
from  Kharkov  National  University  of 
Radio  Electronics,  Kharkov    in  1998 
and  2004,  respectively.  During  2004-
2008, I was an Assistant Professor at the 
Economics and Administrative  science/ 

MIS Department at Applied Science University. Since 2008, I am an Assistant 
Professor  at  the  Faculty  of  Information  technology,  Applied  Science 
University  in  Jordan.  Research  interests  include:  Information  system 
reengineering,  Service  oriented  architecture,  software  agents,  agents 
theory, agents behavior.  

25 

 
 
 
 
