4
2
0
2

r
a

M
2
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
3
1
5
1
.
3
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

CACA Agent: Capability Collaboration based AI Agent

Peng Xu
State Key Lab of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
xupeng@bupt.edu.cn

Haoran Wang∗
State Key Lab of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
wanghr@bupt.edu.cn

Chuang Wang
State Key Lab of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
wangchuang0418@outlook.com

ABSTRACT
As AI Agents based on Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown
potential in practical applications across various fields, how to
quickly deploy an AI agent and how to conveniently expand the
application scenario of AI agents has become a challenge. Previous
studies mainly focused on implementing all the reasoning capa-
bilities of AI agents within a single LLM, which often makes the
model more complex and also reduces the extensibility of AI agent
functionality. In this paper, we propose CACA Agent (Capability
Collaboration based AI Agent), using an open architecture inspired
by service computing. CACA Agent integrates a set of collaborative
capabilities to implement AI Agents, not only reducing the depen-
dence on a single LLM, but also enhancing the extensibility of both
the planning abilities and the tools available to AI agents. Utilizing
the proposed system, we present a demo to illustrate the operation
and the application scenario extension of CACA Agent.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Decision support systems; Web services.

KEYWORDS
AI Agent, LLM, service computing, extensibility

1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable learning and reasoning capabilities, achieving signifi-
cant accomplishments. Consequently, researchers have implemented
decision-making functions in AI Agents based on these models. By
enhancing memory and tool functionalities, AI Agents are now ca-
pable of representing humans to complete various tasks. AI Agents
based on LLMs have shown potential in practical applications across
various fields.

The planning abilities of AI Agents are key factors affecting
the quality of task handling. In some studies, AI Agents efficiently
handle complex tasks by setting sub-goals and using decomposition
strategies[8]. They are capable of self-reflection on past interactions
with the environment, improving the quality of future decisions and
actions[1][10]. However, a significant drawback of this approach is
its failure to equip AI Agents with a priori factual information. This

Xu Liu
China Academy of Industrial Internet
Beijing, China
liuxu@china-aii.com

often results in unrealistic outputs, attributable to the hallucinatory
tendencies of large models.

AI Agents also need to interact with the external environment
through various tools. LLMs have shown great potential in tool us-
age capabilities[3][4] [5][6][7]. AI Agents can greatly expand their
application scenarios by calling open APIs of other applications,
such as using weather APIs to obtain real-time weather data and
using web search APIs to access internet information, providing
users with more personalized and comprehensive services. How-
ever, enabling AI Agents to quickly master the use of new tools is
challenging, often requiring a significant amount of new training
data and model training to achieve good results.

To mitigate these challenges, we have developed a system known
as the Capability Collaborative AI Agent System (CACA Agent).
In this system, a series of capabilities work together to provide
AI Agent functionalities to users. Firstly, we introduced Planning
Capability and Methodology Capability. Planning Capability offers
planning abilities based on LLMs, while Methodology Capability
focuses on providing Planning Capability with factual information
related to planning and the ability to interact with experts. Sec-
ondly, we have drawn on the service computing architecture by
introducing Tools Capability, Tool Broker, and Tool Service into the
"Registration-Discovery-Invocation" framework, thus supporting
dynamically expand tools of AI Agents. Source codes of CACA
Agent can be found here.1

2 RELATED WORKS
Planning capability refers to the ability to decompose complex tasks
into simpler subtasks. Some studies, such as Chain of Thought [8],
utilize the reasoning abilities of LLMs, inspiring the models to plan
and act through prompting words. However, this approach can
result in ’hallucinations,’ where the generated content conflicts
with factual information. Methods to solve this problem include
enabling models to adjust plans based on external environments
(as in ReAct[10]) or human feedback (such as Inner Monologue[1]).
Nevertheless, feedback-based planning strategies are primarily suit-
able for simple tasks. For complex tasks, large models often need
to refer to experts to find solutions.

To address these problems, we designed methodology capability
to enhance planning capability. Methodology Capability enables

∗Corresponding author.

1https://github.com/free4inno/CACA-Agent

 
 
 
 
 
 
the rapid expansion of the knowledge base concerning planning
processes and provides interfaces for expert feedback, facilitating
the convenient introduction of new process knowledge.

The ability to utilize tools is crucial for the functional expansion
of large models and their effective interaction with the real world.
Studies have demonstrated that LLMs are capable of autonomously
learning tool usage through APIs (such as ToolFormer[5]), select
tools from API documentation (as exemplified by Gorilla[3]), or
control actual applications by connecting to RESTful APIs (like
RestGPT[6]). ToolLLM[4] provides a comprehensive tool utilization
framework that includes data construction, model training, and
evaluation. However, these methods have limitations, such as a
finite definition of tools, datasets primarily targeted at machine
learning APIs, the need for data cleaning and annotation to expand
tools, and an inability to meet more complex and diverse needs.

To address these issues, we drew inspiration from the concept
of service computing and designed a tool capability framework
based on the "Registration-Discovery-Invocation" Mechanism. This
framework facilitates rapid expansion of tool services and leverages
the inferential capabilities of LLMs for tool selection. This approach
not only enhances the system’s flexibility but also significantly
simplifies the integration and addition of tools, making the process
more efficient and convenient.

3 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
3.1 Overall System Design
The core concept of the CACA Agent system design centers around
a collaborative set of capabilities aimed at implementing AI Agents.
The CACA Agent system boasts several advantages:

(1) The functionality of an AI Agent is accomplished through
the collaboration of a series of components, each possessing
different capabilities. These components can be indepen-
dently designed, implemented, deployed, and upgraded, and
can be provided by different vendors.

(2) The Methodology Capability enhances the system by en-
abling rapid expansion of the process knowledge base, thereby
improving planning quality with clearer process insights and
facilitating the expansion of planning capabilities.

(3) Inspired by service computing, a tool capability framework
based on the "Registration-Discovery-Invocation" Mecha-
nism is designed to provide flexibility and extensibility of
tools.

Our system design is illustrated in Figure 1. A set of collaborative

capabilities is introduced to implement AI Agents[9].

[Action] Workflow Capability and Reception Capability are

introduced to fulfill the functions of Action in the AI Agent.

Reception Capability primarily provides a user interface, re-
ceives user requests, and responds accordingly. Importantly, Recep-
tion Capability does not directly handle the details of user requests
but converts them into structured task descriptions upon receipt,
then passes the task to Workflow Capability to create a workflow
instance. Once Workflow Capability completes the relevant pro-
cessing steps, Reception Capability feeds back the results of the task
to the user, realizing an effective user request processing workflow.

Figure 1: System Design Diagram

Workflow Capability is mainly used to manage workflow in-
stances for each user request. In the CACA Agent, Workflow in-
stances use the same template. They first interact with Planning
Capability to obtain specific processing procedures, then consult
Tool Capability for relevant tool information according to the needs
of each operation in the process, and finally complete interface calls
based on this information, eventually responding to the users with
the relevant processing results.

[Planning] Planning Capability and Methodology Capability
work together to provide the functions of Planning in the AI Agent.
Planning Capability is primarily realized through LLMs, oper-
ating by providing a process flow for handling requests based on
user queries. The Planning Capability relies on LLMs to implement
the necessary reasoning abilities for planning. To ensure that the
Planning Capability can deliver more accurate processing flows,
and also to facilitate the convenient expansion of the AI Agent’s
application capabilities, it integrates domain knowledge obtained
from the Methodology Capability. This integration involves break-
ing down complex tasks into a series of practical, feasible sub-steps,
and then transmitting this task planning back to the Workflow
Capability. The workflow process of the Planning Capability can
be described by the following formula:

𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑛𝐶𝑎𝑝 (𝑇 𝑎𝑠𝑘, 𝑀𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑦) → [𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐 (𝑆𝑇1), . . . , 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐 (𝑆𝑇𝑛)] (1)

To accommodate various conditions, choices, and repetitive exe-

cution needs, 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ) is further broken down into:

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ) : (𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ), 𝐵𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ(𝑆𝑇𝑖 ), 𝐿𝑜𝑜𝑝 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ))

(2)

Here, each component has a specific function. 𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ) is
responsible for directly executing each sub-task, ensuring each
decomposed task unit is implemented. 𝐵𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ(𝑆𝑇𝑖 ) represents ap-
plying branching logic, choosing different execution paths based on
different situations. 𝐿𝑜𝑜𝑝 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ) allows for the repetition of certain
sub-tasks under specific conditions, providing a looping mechanism

for scenarios requiring repeated execution of the same operation,
such as batch processing or iterative optimization.

Methodology Capability maintains knowledge about process-
ing procedures for a variety of application requests across different
scenarios. Simultaneously, it provides a user interface to experts, al-
lowing them to input knowledge regarding processing procedures
for specific scenarios. We propose a data structure designed to
enable experts to provide and update their professional knowledge.
This data structure comprises several key components: (1) De-
scription provides detailed background of the application scenario.
(2) ProcessSteps is an ordered list outlining each step with title,
description, and required data.(3) DecisionPoints specifically iden-
tifies key decision points in the process along with their decision
logic. (4) Rules section allows experts to input specific conditions
that influence the process path. (5) Exception section describes
methods for addressing potential exceptions in the process. (6) Sug-
gestions provides a space for experts to offer process optimization
suggestions. (7) Reference enables uploading relevant documents
for a more comprehensive explanation of the process.

[Memory] Profile Capability provides the long-term memory
for users. Methodology Capability possesses the knowledge of pro-
cesses and Tool Capability saves the functions of various registered
tools. As to the short-term memory about the processing of each
user request, it is maintained by Workflow Capability.

Profile Capability in the CACA Agent system is tasked with
managing the configuration information the system relies on. Its
main responsibility is to maintain essential information, such as the
basic configuration of the system and accounts required for opera-
tions. Distinguishing between long-term and short-term memory,
the Profile Capability primarily offers long-term memory. Within
the CACA Agent system, short-term memory is predominantly
managed by the Workflow Capability within the workflow instances
for each user request.

[Tool] The Tools function is facilitated through the collabora-
tive efforts of the Tool Capability, Tool Broker, and Tool Service.
Drawing inspiration from Service Computing, the CACA Agent
system employs a "Registration-Discovery-Invocation" framework.
Tool Capability acts as both a tool registry and discovery center.
It handles tool registration requests from the Tool Broker, ensuring
the upkeep and management of information related to various tools.
Additionally, it manages tool discovery requests from Workflow
Capability, providing relevant tool information based on specific
operational needs. Tool Capability utilizes the reasoning abilities
of LLMs to analyze task descriptions and information on registered
tools, selecting the most appropriate tool and returning informa-
tion such as the relevant invocation parameters. This process is
encapsulated in the following formula:

{𝑇selected,𝑇param [input]} = DiscoverTool(𝑈req, {𝑇registered})
(3)
where 𝑇𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 represents the selected tool, 𝑇𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚 denotes the
parameters needed to invoke the tool, 𝑈𝑟𝑒𝑞 is the user’s request,
and 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 signifies the registered tools.

Tool Service specifically provides relevant processing capabili-

ties, primarily through service APIs.

Tool Broker acts as an intermediary for one or more Tool Ser-
vices, facilitating their registration with Tool Capability, and also

ensuring the validity of the services it represents through mecha-
nisms like heartbeats. It is noteworthy that tool registration by the
Tool Broker is typically manually initiated by the tool providers.
After deploying and configuring the relevant tools, providers fill in
the tool information through the interface provided by Tool Broker
and initiate a tool registration request.

3.2 Key Workflows

Figure 2: User Request Processing

The user request processing flow is illustrated in Figure 2. After
a user submits a request, it is initially processed by the Reception
Capability, and then handed off to the Workflow Capability. The
Workflow Capability subsequently queries factual data from the
Profile Capability, creates a new workflow instance, and consults
the Planning Capability for task execution planning. The Planning
Capability, by integrating domain knowledge, divides the task into
sub-steps and provides feedback to the Workflow Capability.

Based on the task planning, the Workflow Capability initiates
an asynchronously executed workflow. During the processing of
sub-steps, it queries the Tool Capability for the most appropriate
tools and parameters, generates tool invocation parameters, and
then calls the tool service to complete the sub-steps. Upon comple-
tion of the workflow process, the Workflow Capability reports the
execution results to the Reception Capability. Finally, the Reception
Capability conveys the processed results back to the user.

4 DEMO
4.1 Use Case
We illustrate the workflow of the CACA Agent through a task
requirement for recommending a destination for a family’s short-
distance travel. The demonstration process is depicted in Figure
3. The demonstration is divided into three scenarios: Scenario 1
showcases the workflow of the CACA Agent, highlighting the inter-
actions between the planning capability and the LLM, as well as the
interactions between the tool capability and the LLM. In Scenario
2, we demonstrate how the planning ability can be extended to
consider weather conditions when recommending a destination.
Scenario 3 showcases the extensibility of the tool.

is facilitated through the expert interaction page provided by the
Methodology Capability (Figure 3 (2)).

4.4 Scenario 3: Extensibility of Tools
However, this new subtask lacks a corresponding tool service. When
the Tool Capability receives a request for this new step and can-
not find a suitable tool, the Workflow Capability informs the Tool
Provider to register a new tool. After the Tool Provider registers a
weather querying service with the Tool Broker (Figure 3 (3)), the
user re-submits the same query. Consequently, when the workflow
reaches the fourth step, the Tool Capability can now match and
return information about the newly added tool service.

5 CONCLUSION
We propose the CACA Agent (Capability Collaboration based AI
Agent), which introduces a set of capabilities working collabora-
tively to implement AI Agents. Drawing inspiration from service
computing, the CACA Agent adopts an open architecture, effec-
tively enhancing the extensibility of both planning abilities and
tools for AI agents. Using the proposed system, we present a demon-
stration to illustrate the operational mechanism and application
scenario extension mechanism of the CACA Agent.

Because LLMs in our design are utilized for domain-specific rea-
soning, the scale of the model could be effectively reduced while
maintaining high inference quality[2]. We are currently transition-
ing the LLM that the Planning and Tool Capabilities rely on from
LLM services (GPT-3.5 Turbo) to an LLM that can be deployed in
a CPU environment. This transition aims to further increase the
practicality and flexibility of AI Agents.

REFERENCES
[1] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence,
Andy Zeng, Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. 2022.
Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning with language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608 (2022).

[2] Ling Luo, Jinzhong Ning, Yingwen Zhao, Zhijun Wang, Zeyuan Ding, Peng Chen,
Weiru Fu, Qinyu Han, Guangtao Xu, Yunzhi Qiu, et al. 2023. Taiyi: A bilingual
fine-tuned large language model for diverse biomedical tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.11608 (2023).

[3] Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2023. Go-
arXiv preprint

rilla: Large language model connected with massive apis.
arXiv:2305.15334 (2023).

[4] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin
Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. 2023. Toolllm: Facilitating large language
models to master 16000+ real-world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 (2023).
[5] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Lan-
guage models can teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761
(2023).

[6] Yifan Song, Weimin Xiong, Dawei Zhu, Cheng Li, Ke Wang, Ye Tian, and Sujian Li.
2023. RestGPT: Connecting Large Language Models with Real-World Applications
via RESTful APIs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06624 (2023).

[7] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang,
Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. 2023. A survey on large
language model based autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432 (2023).
[8] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large
Language Models. (2022).

[9] Lilian Weng. 2023. LLM-powered Autonomous Agents. lilianweng.github.io (Jun

2023). https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/

[10] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 (2022).

Figure 3: Workflow of CACA Agent

4.2 Scenario 1: Workflow of CACA Agent
On the webpage provided by the Reception Capability, a user asks
the CACA Agent: "I want to go to a nearby city with my family this
vacation, can you help me find some suitable cities?" The Reception
Capability forwards the request to the Workflow Capability for
processing (Figure 3 (1a)). Upon receiving the user’s query, the
Workflow Capability consults the Planning Capability to devise a
plan to address the request (Figure 3 (1b)). The Planning Capability
then consults the Methodology Capability for methods to solve the
issue (Figure 3 (1c)). Once a method is identified, it is returned to
the Planning Capability, which, using this information, generates a
structured workflow description with the assistance of an LLM.

For the first subtask in the workflow, the Workflow Capability
queries the Profile Capability for the user’s home address informa-
tion (Figure 3 (1d)). For the second and third subtasks, the Workflow
Capability sequentially queries the Tool Capability for available
tool services (Figure 3 (1e)). At this point, several tools registered in
the Tool Broker meet the subtask requirements. The Tool Capability
then sends information about these tool services to the Workflow
Capability. Having received this information, the Workflow Capa-
bility sequentially invokes these two tool services, thus completing
the entire workflow process (Figure 3 (1f)).

4.3 Scenario 2: Extensibility of Planning Ability
It is important to note that the method process described above does
not consider weather conditions during the trip. To comprehen-
sively address the user’s needs, we add a subtask named "Excluding
cities with adverse weather during the travel period." This addition

