Impact of Relational Networks in Multi-Agent Learning:
A Value-Based Factorization View

Yasin Findik1, Paul Robinette2, Kshitij Jerath3, and S. Reza Ahmadzadeh1

3
2
0
2

t
c
O
9
1

]

A
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
2
1
9
2
1
.
0
1
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Effective coordination and cooperation among
agents are crucial
for accomplishing individual or shared
objectives in multi-agent systems. In many real-world multi-
agent systems, agents possess varying abilities and constraints,
making it necessary to prioritize agents based on their specific
properties to ensure successful coordination and cooperation
within the team. However, most existing cooperative multi-
agent algorithms do not take into account these individual
differences, and lack an effective mechanism to guide coor-
dination strategies. We propose a novel multi-agent learning
approach that incorporates relationship awareness into value-
based factorization methods. Given a relational network, our
approach utilizes inter-agents relationships to discover new
team behaviors by prioritizing certain agents over other, ac-
counting for differences between them in cooperative tasks.
We evaluated the effectiveness of our proposed approach by
conducting fifteen experiments in two different environments.
The results demonstrate that our proposed algorithm can
influence and shape team behavior, guide cooperation strategies,
and expedite agent learning. Therefore, our approach shows
promise for use in multi-agent systems, especially when agents
have diverse properties.

I. INTRODUCTION

Multi-agent scenarios are ubiquitous in various domains
such as search and rescue operations [1], autonomous driv-
ing [2], [3], and multiplayer games [4]. In such scenarios,
the success of achieving shared or individual goals criti-
cally depends on the coordination and cooperation between
agents [5]. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
approaches have emerged as a popular solution to address
the general challenges of cooperation in multi-agent envi-
ronments. Yet, cooperative MARL faces several challenges
that are intrinsic to multi-agent systems, such as the curse
of dimensionality [6], [7], non-stationarity [5], and global
exploration [8]. Furthermore, the presence of agents having
constraints (e.g., limited battery life, restricted mobility) or
distinct roles exacerbates these challenges.

Among the various MARL methods for cooperative
tasks, the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execu-
tion (CTDE) [9] paradigm has become very prominent
for addressing numerous cooperative challenges, including
but not limited to the ones previously mentioned. While
CTDE-based approaches have demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in tackling coordination tasks [10], they lack the

1 PeARL Lab, Richard Miner School of Computer and In-
formation Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, MA, USA
yasin findik@student.uml.edu, reza@cs.uml.edu

2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of

Massachusetts Lowell, MA, USA paul robinette@uml.edu

3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Massachusetts

Lowell, MA, USA kshitij jerath@uml.edu

ability to steer the coordination strategy that the algorithms
converge to. This limitation arises from the fact that these
approaches (a) assume agents are identical within the team
and (b) do not incorporate any mechanism for specifying
the inter-agent relationships. To address this issue, some
algorithms have adopted the coordination graph concept [11]
to enable the sharing of action-values among the agents using
deep learning [12]. However, they require to learn weighing
and distributing action-values from a given undirected graph,
which may not fully consider the influence of certain behav-
iors over others. Overall, the problem of agents possessing
diverse attributes, a team structure, or a notion of priority
among agents remains unresolved.

In this paper, we propose a novel framework that leverages
a relational network to capture the relative importance and
priorities that agents assign to one another, enabling agents
to uncover new cooperation strategies. Our framework uses
CTDE paradigm to solve cooperative MARL challenges.
We evaluated our approach using fifteen experiments in
two distinct environments, each featuring a cooperative task
among multiple agents. We have compared our method
against the state of the art algorithm, Value Decomposition
Networks (VDN) [13]. Our results and comparisons sup-
port three main findings. First, unlike other methods, our
approach is highly effective in steering the agents towards a
specific team behavior, as governed by the relational network.
Second, the experiments reveal that our framework enables
agents to uncover new behaviors that promote successful task
completion, while also preserving the essential structure of
the team. Lastly, our results indicate that the proposed ap-
proach accelerates the learning of team behavior, particularly
in scenarios where agents face constraints, and relational
networks play a critical role.

II. RELATED WORK

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has gained
significant attention in recent years as an active research
area, particularly in cooperative settings. Various approaches
have been explored to train agents to cooperate effectively
towards a shared goal. One such approach is fully centralized
learning, where a single controller is shared among all agents,
enabling them to learn a joint policy or value function in uni-
son [14]. Despite the potential advantages of fully centralized
learning, this approach can be computationally expensive and
can lead to intractability issues due to the exponential growth
of the observation and action space with the increasing
number of agents. Alternatively, fully decentralized learning
is another approach to MARL in cooperative settings, where

 
 
 
 
 
 
each agent
independently learns its own policy. In such
approaches, the cooperative behavior arises from the learned
policies as they are applied in the environment. For instance,
Independent Q-Learning (IQL) [15] trains each agent using a
separate action-value table via Q-learning [16]. Since tabular
Q-learning is insufficient for addressing high-dimensional
state and action space, IQL framework was later extended
with function approximation [17]. Yet, independent learning
in multi-agent settings is susceptible to non-stationarity,
stemming from other agents’ actions from the perspective of
one agent. Due to the invalidity of the Markov property in
non-stationary environments, the convergence of decentral-
ized algorithms based on Q-learning cannot be ensured [18].
Later,
the introduction of fully decentralized algorithms
featuring networked agents [19] capable of communicating
and exchanging information has emerged as a promising
approach for addressing the non-stationarity problem. In such
frameworks, the connections between agents are governed
by an undirected graph. In our approach, we also utilize a
(directed) graph to represent the rapport among the agents.
However, in contrast to frameworks that prioritize the use
of a communication channel [19], our graph serves to sym-
bolize and establish relations between agents, resulting in a
relational network that directly influences team behavior.

To overcome the limitations associated with fully cen-
tralized and fully decentralized learning in cooperative
MARL scenarios, a novel approach has been proposed
known as Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) [9]. This paradigm enables individual agents to
execute their actions while a centralized mechanism inte-
grates their strategies, thereby ensuring effective coordination
and alignment towards a shared goal. The CTDE paradigm
has been implemented using both policy-based and value-
based methods. Specifically, policy-based methods, such as
Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (MAD-
DPG) [20] and Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
(MAPPO) [21], incorporate a critic that can take into ac-
count the global observations of all agents. On the other
hand, value-based techniques, including Value Decomposi-
tion Networks (VDN) [13], QMIX [22], and QTRAN [23],
enhance Q-Learning by integrating a centralized function that
calculates the joint Q-value based on the individual action-
values of each agent. These techniques have been shown
to be effective in addressing the challenges of multi-agent
coordination and achieving higher performance in various
scenarios.

Prior research in MARL has predominantly concentrated
on achieving an optimal solution for cooperation problems,
ranging from fully centralized learning to CTDE paradigm.
Yet, the attainment of an optimal or sub-optimal solution
by a multi-agent team is intrinsically contingent upon the
underlying dynamics of interaction and collaboration among
agents [24], [25]. While they utilize reward sharing among
agents to adapt individual rewards based on their relation-
ships represented as a relational network, our method in-
volves adjusting the agents’ contribution to the team reward.
This adjustment is specifically determined by the relational

network and does not rely on reward sharing among agents.
Ultimately, our method ensures that agents still receive the
same individual reward provided by the environment.

Our study proposes a framework that allows for the
integration of relational networks into the CTDE approaches
to gain a deeper understanding of the impact of inter-agent
relationships on cooperation strategies and team interactions.
Specifically, our investigation focuses on the context of
value-based factorization. However, it is worth noting that
the use of relational networks, as proposed in our study, can
be extended to other CTDE algorithms.

III. BACKGROUND

A. Markov Decision Process

We characterized Decentralized Markov Decision Process
as a tuple ⟨S, A, R, T , γ⟩ where s ∈ S indicates the true
state of the environment, the joint set of individual actions
and rewards are represented by A := {a1, a2, . . . , an},
R := {r1, r2, . . . , rn}, respectively, T (s, A, s′) : S × A ×
S (cid:55)→ [1, 0] is the dynamics function defining the transition
probability, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor.

B. Deep Q-Learning

The Deep Q-Network (DQN) [26] is a variant of an
action-value method, which defines Q(s, a) = E[G|S =
s, A = a] where G denotes the return, that employs a deep
neural network to approximate the Q-function, represented
as ˆQ(s, a, θ) where θ is the weight vector. Unlike tabular
Q-learning, DQN is capable of effectively handling high-
dimensional state and action spaces by leveraging deep
learning. However, the training of DQN poses a significant
challenge due to instability and divergence caused by the
Q-network parameters being updated in each step, which
violates the assumption of independently and identically dis-
tributed (i.i.d) data points. To address these challenges, Mnih
et al. [26] have also proposed several techniques, including
experience replay and fixed Q-target networks, which have
since become standard in many deep reinforcement learning
algorithms.

In a nutshell, two deep Q-neural networks are used for
each Q-function, namely: Prediction Neural Network (P-
NN), and fixed Target Neural Network (T-NN) which is the
P-NN from a previous iteration. Also, a replay memory is
utilized to keep a large number of transitions experienced by
the agent during its interactions with the environment. Each
transition consists of a tuple ⟨s, a, r, s′⟩. To train the P-NN,
a batch of transitions of size b is sampled from memory.
The Temporal Difference (TD) error is calculated between
the P-NN value and T-NN value, as follows:

eTD =

[r + γ max

(Q(s′, a′, θt)) − Q(s, a, θp)],

(1)

a′

b
(cid:88)

i=1

where θp are the weights of the P-NN, and θt are those of the
T-NN which is regularly updated with θp. The parameters of
the P-NN are updated using an optimizer in the direction of
reducing eTD. In centralized multi-agent systems, a single Q-
function is employed for the meta-agent, providing access to

the observations of all agents, whereas, in fully decentralized
systems, each agent
learns its Q-function independently
using DQN.

C. Value Function Factorization

Value function factorization methods, which adhere to
the CTDE paradigm, have been proposed as an effi-
cient approach for handling a joint action-value function,
whose complexity increases exponentially with the num-
ber of agents. These methods effectively address the non-
stationarity problem of decentralized learning through cen-
tralized training and overcome the scalability issue of cen-
tralized learning through decentralized execution. VDN [13]
and QMIX [22] are two exemplary methods for factorizing
value functions.

VDN and QMIX both maintain a separate action-value
function Q for each agent i ∈ {1, ..., n}. They merge these
individual Qi values to obtain the central action value Qtot
using additivity and monotonicity, respectively. Specifically,
VDN sums Qis to obtain Qtot, as

Qtot =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

Qi(s, ai),

while QMIX combines them using a state-dependent contin-
uous monotonic function, as follows:

Qtot = fs(Q1(s, a1), ..., Qn(s, an)),

≥ 0, ∀i ∈ {1, ..., n}.

where ∂fs
∂Qi

These value function factorization methods most com-
monly utilize DQN to approximate the action value func-
tion. Different from decentralized learning where all agents’
individual P-NNs are trained independently by using (1), or
centralized learning where a single P-NN exists and is trained
with (1) by providing access to the observations of all agents,
in these value function factorization methods, Qtot is used to
compute eTD by updating (1) as follows:

eTD =

b
(cid:88)

i=1

[rteam + γ max

u′

(Qtot(s′, u′, θt)) − Qtot(s, u, θp)],

(2)

where rteam is the sum of agents’ rewards with uniform
weights, u is the joint action of the agents. The agents’ P-
NN are trained using an optimizer in the direction reducing
obtained eTD. The coordination of agent actions towards
maximizing the team reward is facilitated by this process.
Consequently,
the central aspect of the CTDE paradigm
becomes apparent: the agent networks are trained using a
centralized Qtot, while the actions of each agent are deter-
mined by its own neural network, rendering the execution
decentralized.

IV. PROPOSED METHOD

In cooperative MARL, the presence different team struc-
tures often yield multiple solutions with varying optimality.
Value factorization methods and others, strive to maximize
team rewards and converge towards one of several solutions,

Fig. 1: The overall relationship awareness framework. In blue are
the agents’ P-NNs and T-NNs. The relational network is represented
in green. Mixing networks are used combine the individual action-
values to obtain the central action-value.

possibly achieving the global optimum. However, stochastic-
ity in agents’ exploration can influence convergence towards
a particular team behavior if multiple cooperation strategies
exist with the same maximum total reward. Furthermore,
in real-world settings, individual agents/robots may be sub-
ject to varying constraints or possess distinctive attributes
that significantly influence overall team behavior, making
it challenging to learn a viable solution without a deeper
understanding of the team structure. We propose a novel
framework, depicted in Fig. 1, that incorporates relationship
awareness into the agents’ learning algorithm. And, we
opt to explore and study the framework using VDN, as
it is a simple yet effective CTDE approach for learning
cooperative behaviors, leading us to introduce Relationship-
Aware VDN (RA-VDN). RA-VDN is a generalization over
VDN that enhances team behavior, provides control over
optimal solutions, and expedites agent learning by utilizing
the relationships between agents.

The inter-agent relationships are represented by a rela-
tional network which is utilized to integrate the individual
rewards to obtain the team reward used in (2). The MDP,
defined in III-A, is modified to include the relational network
which is characterized by a directed graph G = (V, E, W)
where each agent i ∈ {1, ..., n} is a vertex vi, E is the set
of directed edges eij directed from vi to vj, and the weight
of the edges is represented by the matrix W with elements
wij ∈ [0, 1] for each edge. The direction and weight of
each edge signify the relationship between the agents. An
edge eij directed from i to j indicates that agent i cares
about or is vested in the outcomes for agent j. Based on the
modified MDP represented as a tuple ⟨S, A, R, T , G, γ⟩, the
team reward defined as follows:

rteam =

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i∈V

j∈Ei

wijrj,

where Ei denotes the set of vertex indices that have an edge
directed from vi, and rj is the reward of the agent represented

Agents Neural Network -PredictionAgent 1Agent NReplay Memory<(st1, ..., stn), (at1, ..., atn), (rt1, ..., rtn), (s't1, ..., s'tn)>  <(st1, ..., stn), (at1, ..., atn)>  <(st1, at1)>  <(stn, atn)>  QiAgents Neural Network -Targetargmax(Q1)<(s't1, ..., s'tn)>  argmax(Qi)argmax(Qn)<(rt1, ..., rtn)>  RelationsMixing Network - PredictionQ1QnMixing Network - TargetRteamTD-ErrorQTtotQPtotLOSSBackpropagationAgent 1Agent N<(s't1)>  <(s'tn)>  by vj. For example, the directed graph as follows:

w11 = 1

A1

w12 = 0.5

A2

w22 = 1

Rteam = r1 + 1.5r2

illustrates the relationships between two agents. Examining
the team reward obtained using this relational network re-
veals that the second agent’s contribution to the team reward
is increased by adding half of the reward second agent
receives with the assistance of first agent. By giving more
emphasis on the second agents, the algorithm can produce
various emergent behaviors, such as the first agent helping
the second agent in reaching its goal, or sacrificing own
individual reward entirely to increase the second agent’s
reward. Furthermore, it can accelerates the learning of team
behavior by agents.

Similar to other CTDE approaches, in VDN, the primary
objective of each agent i is to obtain a policy, that optimizes
the team performance. The learned policy is then employed
to determine the optimal action of the agent ai for a given
state s, as follows:

ai = πVDN

i

(s) = max

(Qi(s, a, θp)),

a

where πi represents the policy of agent i, and Qi is repre-
sented using DQN to approximate its action-value function.
For all agents, the notation takes the following form:

u = πVDN(s) = max

(Q(s, u, θp)),

u

where u is a vector, containing the actions of all the agents
and π is a vector of policies, where each element πi
represents the policy of the respective agent i. We formulate
RA-VDN, as follows:

u = πRA-VDN(s|G) = max

(Q(s, u, θp|G)),

u

where the policy is conditioned by the relational network G.
We would like to highlight that in cases where G represents
a self-interest relational network the policies for RA-VDN
and VDN become equivalent. That is because in VDN, each
agent contributes their reward equally to the team reward.

πRA-VDN(s|G) ≡ πVDN(s),

where G ∈ {a, d, h} networks depicted in Fig. 3. Overall,
RA-VDN allows for the shaping and influencing of team
behavior among agents utilizing different relational networks,
whereas VDN leads to agents randomly converging to one of
multiple solutions without any control over the cooperation
strategies. Also, noted from the experiments, it accelerates
convergence of the agents to the team behavior where agents
have constraints.

V. EXPERIMENTS

A. Environments

Fig. 2: (a-d) multi-agent grid-world environment. (e) Switch envi-
ronment with four agents. In the three-agent setup, the yellow agent
and its goal location were removed. For the two-agent setup, the
green agent and its goal location were in addition removed.

1) Multi-agent Grid-world Environment: We created a
5x5 grid-world environment with resources and two agents,
colored red and blue (see Fig. 2(a-d)). The resources are
categorized based on their color, green resources are con-
sumable by both agents, while red and blue resources can
only be consumed by their respective colored agents. The
objective of each episode is for the agents to consume all
the resources by visiting their locations, with each agent
limited to one resource per episode. The agents have five
possible actions: move up, down, left, right, or stay still.
They can also push each other if they are adjacent and the
pushing agent takes a non-idle action towards the pushed
agent, which must be idle. After a push, the pushing agent
remains in place while the other agent moves one space
in the pushed direction. Consuming a resource yields +10
reward, while the agents are penalized with −1 for each
time step per unconsumed resource unless they occupy a
resource location which serves as a safe spot. The episode
ends when all resources are consumed or the maximum time
steps are reached. We designed this environment to challenge
agents with real-world constraints, such as limited battery life
and restricted mobility, and to demonstrate how relational
networks can help achieve cooperative tasks by prioritizing
based on the agents’ constraints.

2) Switch Environment: Figure 2(e) illustrates the Switch
environment, which comprises a grid-world divided into two
regions connected by a narrow bridge. The environment
accommodates up to four agents with distinct colors, each
aiming to reach their respective goal boxes of matching color
on the opposite end. This is challenging due to the narrow
bridge, which allows only one agent to cross at a time.
Agents can move left, right, up, down, or stay still, and
receive a reward of +5 upon reaching their goal, but incur
a penalty of −0.1 per time step away from it. The episode
ends after 50 time steps or when all agents reach their goals,
requiring collaborative efforts among agents to maximize
rewards and prevent obstructing each other’s paths. We select
this environment as it offers various cooperation strategies
and facilitates evaluating relational networks. Additionally,
it was employed in the original VDN paper, enabling a lucid
comparison between our approach and VDN.

B. Models and Hyperparameters

To assess the efficacy of the proposed approach in shaping
and enhancing team behaviors, we applied the RA-VDN
algorithm to two environments: a multi-agent grid-world
environment, and the Switch environment proposed in [27].

In setting our algorithm up for both environments, we
employed a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with two hidden
layers, each consisting of 128 neurons and utilizing the ReLU
activation function. The prediction model for each agent is

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)trained 10 times per episode using uniformly drawn batches
of size b = 32 selected from the replay memory, which has
a capacity of 50k time-steps. We used Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.001 and the loss function is the squared
TD-error. The weights of the target network are updated
with those of the prediction network every 200 episodes. To
promote exploration, an ε-greedy method is applied, where
ε is linearly annealed over time. Finally, the discount factor,
γ was set to 0.99.

The results of the experiments for both environments,
presented in Fig. 4 and 5, illustrate the average training
reward over 10 runs as represented by the shaded regions,
and the average test rewards of the agents, denoted by the
solid lines. The test rewards were determined by evaluating
the individual rewards of agents based on a greedy strategy,
with the training process being interrupted every 50 episodes.

C. Results for Multi-agent Grid-world Environment

We evaluated the performance of RA-VDN through eight
independent experiments across four distinct configurations
utilizing various relational networks within this environment,
and compare the individual rewards obtained by the agents.
Resource Collection (RC) Scenario: This scenario com-
prises of two agents, represented by red and blue circles
and an undedicated resource depicted by a green rectangle,
as shown in Fig. 2(a). The resource has intentionally been
positioned in closer proximity to the red agent. The determi-
nation of which agent is going to consume the given resource
is contingent upon a relative importance of the agents within
the team. When the importance of agents is equal (like in
VDN), as in Fig. 3(a), or when the importance of the red
agent surpasses that of the blue agent, as in Fig. 3(c), the
red agent consumes the resource since resource is located
closer to it (see Fig. 4(b)). Nevertheless, by introducing a
relational network that assigns greater importance to the blue
agent (Fig. 3(b)), the red agent reserves the resource for
the blue agent’s consumption, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). By
enabling the value decomposition algorithm to access the
relationships among agents, it becomes feasible for agents
to discover novel behaviors.
Resource Collection with Restricted Mobility (RC-RM)
Scenario: As illustrated in Fig. 2(b), this experiment in-
volves two agents, with the red agent restricted to vertical
movement, and one resource positioned out of reach for the
red agent without the help of blue. After training for 25000
episodes using the relationship in Fig. 3(c), where the red
agent’s significance surpasses the blue agent’s, the blue agent
assisted the red agent in reaching the resource, resulting
in a higher individual reward for the red agent (7.0 ± 0.0)
than the blue agent (−3.0 ± 0.3), as shown in Fig. 4(c) and
Table I. However, when the relational network in Fig. 3(b)
is employed, the red agent deviates from the blue agent’s
path to the resource, resulting in the blue agent (7.0 ± 0.0)
receiving a higher reward than the red agent (−4.0 ± 0.0),
as shown in Fig. 4(d). These findings show the significance
of the relative importance of agents in determining their
behavior and outcomes in team settings.

Fig. 3: Relational networks employed in RA-VDN.

Dedicated Resource Collection with Restricted Mobility
(DRC-RM) Scenario: In this setup, the environment features
two agents and two resources, with each resource dedicated
to an agent of the same color, as shown in Fig. 2(c).
Similar to the prior experiment, the red agent can only move
vertically. The optimal solution entails the blue agent helping
the red agent before consuming its assigned resource and
only then proceeding to consume its own resource. The
findings of training with VDN for 40000 episodes show
that the blue agent only learns the optimal solution in 2
out of 10 runs (20%), resulting in the blue agent’s reward
being (−11.7 ± 11.6) and the red agent’s reward being
(−7.4 ± 11.1), as depicted in Table I. Yet, when using RA-
VDN, the relational network in Fig. 3(c) accelerates the agent
learning process, leading to significantly higher rewards for
both the red agent (2.4 ± 6.3) and blue agent (0.9 ± 3.1), as
shown in Fig. 4(f) and Table I. RA-VDN outperformed VDN
by achieving the optimal solution in 80% of runs and yielding
higher agent rewards. Overall, this experiment demonstrates
how proper relationships can expedite the learning of team
behavior when any of the agents need special assistance, and
RA-VDN benefits from it.

Resource Collection with Battery Constraint (RC-BC)
Scenario: In this experiment, two agents with battery con-
straints and two undedicated resources are used, as shown
in Fig. 2(d). The red and blue agents have a maximum limit
of 10 and 5 non-idle actions per episode, respectively, to
mimic battery constraints. One resource is located beyond
the blue agent’s reach due to its limited battery, making
the optimal policy for the team to have the red agent to
consume the distant resource and leave the nearest one
for the blue agent. However, after training VDN for over
10000 episodes, the red agent failed to learn this strategy, as
indicated in Fig. 4(g). It learned to relinquish the nearest
resource for the blue agent
to use as a safe spot after
consumption. Unfortunately, this led to the other resource

TABLE I: Average reward with 95% confidence intervals for ten
runs on multi-agent grid environment after training completed.

RC
Scenario

RC-RM
Scenario

DRC-RM
Scenario

RC-BC
Scenario

Relational
Net-
work

Red
Agent

Blue
Agent

Fig.
3(b)

-4.2
±
0.4

7.0
±
0.0

Fig.
3(c)

9.0
±
0.0

-2.0
±
0.0

Fig.
3(c)

7.0
±
0.0

-3.0
±
0.3

Fig.
3(b)

-4.0
±
0.0

7.0
±
0.0

Fig.
3(a)

Fig.
3(c)

Fig.
3(a)

Fig.
3(b)

-7.4
±
11.1

-11.7
±
11.6

2.4
±
6.3

0.9
±
3.1

2.0
±
1.0

0.3
±
2.3

5.0
±
0.0

7.9
±
0.2

A1A2(f)A3A1A2(e)A3A1A2(g)A3A1A2A1A2A1A2(i)A3A4(b)(c)A1A2(a)A1(d)A3A1A2(h)A3A4A2Fig. 4: Multi-agent grid-world environment results with different relational networks (details in Section V-C).

remaining unconsumed since an agent could consume only
one resource, causing episode termination solely due to the
time-step threshold. Yet, by employing RA-VDN with the
relational network illustrated in Fig. 3(b),
the red agent
learns to reserve the nearest resource for the blue agent’s
consumption and proceed towards the other resource as it
cares about the blue agent. As shown in Fig. 4(h) and Table I,
the blue agent receives an individual reward of (7.9 ± 0.2),
while the red agent gets (5.0 ± 0.0). These results indicate
that RA-VDN is capable of finding and converging to the
optimal policy, while VDN fails to resolve the environment
where agents have different battery life.

D. Results for Switch Environment

We conducted seven independent experiments in the
Switch environment using two, three, or four agents. Our
algorithm was compared against VDN based on both indi-
vidual and collected rewards by the team. In Fig. 5, collective
reward shows the sum of individual rewards attained by the
agents (i.e., the team reward maximized in VDN). Note that
collective reward differs from team reward used to train RA-
VDN, which is computed using a relational network.

Two-Agent Scenario: As depicted in Fig. 2(e), this scenario
includes a red and a blue agent with their corresponding
goal locations that marked with the same color. Given that
only one agent can cross the bridge at a time, there are
two optimal policies for this scenario: either the red agent
crosses the bridge ahead of the blue agent or the blue agent
does. VDN, in each run, converges to one of the two optimal
policies because of the algorithm’s equal weighting of both
agents (i.e., this is the equivalent of the network in Fig. 3(a)),
which leads to a randomized selection of optimal policies.
As shown in Fig. 5(a) and Table II, the individual rewards
for both agents are nearly identical as a result of averaging

their rewards over 10 runs. In other words, in each run the
agent that crosses the bridge maximizes its individual reward
and the average value for both agents become similar as the
number of runs increases. For RA-VDN, we introduce two
relational networks: first the red agent places importance to
the blue agent (Fig. 3(b)); second, the blue agent assigns
importance to the red agent (Fig. 3(c)). These networks allow
us to investigate team behavior and solution preference. The
results in Fig. 5(b) and Table II indicate using RA-VDN
with network in Fig. 3(b), the blue agent accumulates higher
individual rewards (4.40 ± 0.00) as it is the first to use the
bridge and than the red agent (3.80 ± 0.00). Conversely,
when the network in Fig. 3(c) was applied, the situation
is reversed with the red agent having a higher total reward
(4.39 ± 0.02), as depicted in Fig. 5(c). Comparing results
from these three experiments reveals that
the collective
rewards are the same while the relational network influences
which optimal solution the algorithm converges to.

Three-Agent Scenario: This setup involves three agents
positioned as illustrated in Fig. 2(e). The optimal policy,
which minimizes waiting time, is for the pair of agents
on the left side to cross the bridge initially, as they are
heading in the same direction, either in the order of the
red–green–blue or green–red–blue. As illustrated in Fig. 5(d)
and Table II, VDN experiments show that red and green
agents have similar individual rewards (4.38 ± 0.04 and
4.35 ± 0.02) since they randomly alternate taking the lead
in passing the bridge over 10 runs, while the blue agent
has lower individual reward (3.66 ± 0.04). Yet, RA-VDN
has the ability to influence the order through the relational
network shown in Fig. 3(e), where the red agent holds
the highest significance. Fig. 5(e) and Table II indicate the
bridge usage order becomes consistent as red–green–blue,
with individual rewards of 4.40 ± 0.00, 4.30 ± 0.00, and

(c)(d)(b)(a)(g)(h)(f)(e)A1A2A1A2A1A2A1A2A1A2A1A2A1A2A1A2Fig. 5: Switch environment results with varying number of agents and different relational networks (details in Section V-D).

3.70 ± 0.00, respectively.

Utilizing relational networks can also facilitate the dis-
covery of new behaviors for agents to converge upon, while
guiding the algorithm to converge towards an optimal solu-
tion. For instance, Fig. 3(f) shows that both the red and green
agents prioritize the blue agent, granting it the first turn.
Subsequently, the second turn is randomly assigned to either
the red or green agent, as their importance weights are equal
and they share the same side. The findings of RA-VDN with
this network are indicated in Fig. 5(b) and Table II, which
reveal that the blue agent has a higher individual reward
(4.40 ± 0.00) than the others while the red (3.75 ± 0.03) and
green (3.76 ± 0.07) agents have almost the same rewards
due to alternating turns. Furthermore, to assess the agents’
adherence to relational networks and cooperative strategies
over individual and collective rewards, we introduce a novel
relational network illustrated in Fig. 3(g). The network elicits
the sequential crossing of the bridge as follows: the green
agent crosses from the left side, followed by the blue agent
from the right, and the red agent crosses from the left,
resulting in the red agent waiting for the alternating turn.
Fig. 5(g) and Table II confirm that the agents prioritize
relationships over collective reward, even at a cost. However,
the collective reward is lower here as the red agent sacrifices
more by taking the last turn, due to the environment’s optimal
policy being influenced by the relational network, leading to
the convergence of the agents towards the desired behavior.

Four-Agent Scenario: In this experimental, four agents
are used, with an equal number of agents on each side
(Fig. 2(e)). VDN yields a solution that involves stochastic
selection of the side that crosses the bridge initially, as well
as which agent from that side takes the first turn. The results,
depicted in Fig. 5(h) and Table II, demonstrate that the
individual rewards derived from VDN are very similar, owing
to the stochasticity induced by the existence of multiple
optimal policies that equally weight all the agents. Yet, RA-
VDN with the relation network illustrated in Fig. 3(i) has a
significant effect on the sequence of bridge usage. The yellow
agent is given importance by all agents, leading to the right
side taking the initial turn and allowing the yellow agent to
be the first to cross the bridge, as shown in Fig. 5(i) and
Table II. We anticipate that the blue agent passes the bridge
second to mitigate the undesirable impact of remaining in
the environment, as in three-agent scenario. However, due
to the increased complexity of the team network and small
amount of negative reward, in 80% of the runs, the blue agent
passes the bridge subsequent to the yellow agent, while in
the remaining 20%, the bridge is crossed by either of the
three agents randomly. The observed behavior leads to the
blue, red, and green agents receiving individual rewards that
are highly comparable, while the yellow agent attains the
highest reward (4.34 ± 0.09).

To address the challenge of the team failing to fully learn
the expected team behavior, we propose an extension to

TABLE II: Average reward with 95% confidence intervals for ten runs on Switch environment after training completed.

Relational Network
Red Agent
Blue Agent
Green Agent
Yellow Agent

Two-Agent Scenario

VDN
N/A
4.10±0.19
4.15±0.15
—
—

RA-VDN

Fig. 3(b)
3.80±0.00
4.40±0.00
—
—

Fig. 3(c)
4.39±0.02
3.86±0.06
—
—

VDN
N/A
4.38±0.04
3.66±0.04
4.35±0.02
—

Three-Agent Scenario
RA-VDN
Fig. 3(f)
3.75±0.03
4.40±0.00
3.76±0.07
—

Fig. 3(e)
4.40±0.00
3.70±0.00
4.30±0.00
—

Fig. 3(g)
3.13±0.03
3.78±0.02
4.40±0.00
—

Four-Agent Scenario

VDN
N/A
3.70±0.34
3.78±0.25
3.77±0.36
3.80±0.30

RA-VDN
Fig. 3(i)
3.43±0.29
3.61±0.17
3.54±0.23
4.34±0.09

Frozen RA-VDN
Fig. 3(i)
3.47±0.15
4.20±0.00
3.54±0.14
4.40±0.00

A1A2A3A1A2A3A1A2A1A2A1A2A3A4A1A2A3A4(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)(i)(j)A1A2A3(a)Freezing1000our algorithm, which includes freezing the neural network.
Initially, the neural network of agents is trained for 1000
episodes, where the primary agent learns to reach its goal,
and the others learn to prioritize it. After the initial phase, we
freeze the prioritized agent’s network (i.e., its parameters no
longer become updated) and it becomes a dynamic element
of the environment for subsequent 9000 episodes of training,
with other agents learning their policies accordingly. Through
this approach, the complexity of the problem is reduced, and
the learning process is accelerated. The results, presented
in Fig. 5(j) and Table II, demonstrate that the yellow agent
achieves the highest reward (4.40 ± 0.00) among the four
agents because it is the initial agent to utilize the bridge.
The blue agent’s reward (4.20 ± 0.00) surpasses that of the
remaining agents because it can pass the bridge right after
the yellow agent, while the individual rewards of the green
(3.54 ± 0.14) and red (3.47 ± 0.15) agents are close due to
the alternate turns they take.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We propose a novel framework that incorporates relation-
ship awareness into agents’ learning algorithms. Our frame-
work enables the discovery of new cooperative behaviors
and the ability to guide agents’ behavior based on inter-
agent relationships. Our experiments, conducted in a multi-
agent grid-world environment, validate the effectiveness of
our approach in solving environments with agents having
different abilities. Moreover, in the Switch environment, we
demonstrated the algorithm’s power in influencing agents’
behavior within a team. However, we acknowledge that
adjusting relational weights can become challenging as the
relational network becomes denser with an increasing num-
ber of agents. To overcome this issue, we introduce the idea
of freezing the agents neural networks, which we show to be
effective in reducing problem complexity and expediting the
learning process. As a next step, we aim to conduct additional
experiments in more complex environments that involve an
increased number of agents and compare the performance of
our algorithm with other state-of-the-art methods.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported in part by NSF (IIS-2112633) and

the Army Research Lab (W911NF20-2-0089).

REFERENCES

[1] A. Kleiner, J. Prediger, and B. Nebel, “Rfid technology-based explo-
ration and slam for search and rescue,” in 2006 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
IEEE, 2006, p. 4054.
[2] S. D. Pendleton, H. Andersen, X. Du, X. Shen, M. Meghjani, Y. H.
Eng, D. Rus, and M. H. Ang Jr, “Perception, planning, control, and
coordination for autonomous vehicles,” Machines, vol. 5, no. 1, 2017.
[3] T. Kim and K. Jerath, “Congestion-aware cooperative adaptive cruise
control for mitigation of self-organized traffic jams,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6621–
6632, 2022.

[4] P. Peng, Y. Wen, Y. Yang, Q. Yuan, Z. Tang, H. Long, and J. Wang,
“Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated nets: Emergence of human-
level coordination in learning to play starcraft combat games,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.10069, 2017.

[5] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, and B. De Schutter, “A comprehensive survey
of multiagent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 38,
no. 2, pp. 156–172, 2008.

[6] Y. Shoham, R. Powers, and T. Grenager, “If multi-agent learning is the
answer, what is the question?” Artificial intelligence, vol. 171, no. 7,
pp. 365–377, 2007.

[7] H. Haeri, K. Jerath, and J. Leachman, “Thermodynamics-Inspired
Macroscopic States of Bounded Swarms,” ASME Letters in Dynamic
Systems and Control, vol. 1, no. 1, 03 2020, 011015. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4046580

[8] L. Matignon, G. J. Laurent, and N. Le Fort-Piat, “Independent rein-
forcement learners in cooperative markov games: a survey regarding
coordination problems,” The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 27,
no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2012.

[9] F. A. Oliehoek, M. T. Spaan, and N. Vlassis, “Optimal and approxi-
mate q-value functions for decentralized pomdps,” Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, vol. 32, pp. 289–353, 2008.

[10] S. Gronauer and K. Diepold, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing: a survey,” Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–49, 2022.
[11] C. Guestrin, D. Koller, and R. Parr, “Multiagent planning with factored
mdps,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 14,
2001.

[12] W. B¨ohmer, V. Kurin, and S. Whiteson, “Deep coordination graphs,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020, pp.
980–991.

[13] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, et al.,
“Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.

[14] C. Claus and C. Boutilier, “The dynamics of reinforcement learning in
cooperative multiagent systems,” AAAI/IAAI, vol. 1998, no. 746-752,
p. 2, 1998.

[15] M. Tan, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooper-
ative agents,” in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on
machine learning, 1993, pp. 330–337.

[16] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine learning, vol. 8,

pp. 279–292, 1992.

[17] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, D. Kodelja, I. Kuzovkin, K. Korjus, J. Aru,
J. Aru, and R. Vicente, “Multiagent cooperation and competition with
deep reinforcement learning,” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 4, 2017.
[18] P. Hernandez-Leal, M. Kaisers, T. Baarslag, and E. M. De Cote, “A
survey of learning in multiagent environments: Dealing with non-
stationarity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09183, 2017.

[19] K. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Liu, T. Zhang, and T. Basar, “Fully decen-
tralized multi-agent reinforcement learning with networked agents,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2018, pp.
5872–5881.

[20] R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mor-
datch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive
environments,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 30, 2017.

[21] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu, “The
surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative, multi-agent games,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2021.

[22] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 7234–7284, 2020.

[23] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “Qtran:
Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learn-
ing. PMLR, 2019, pp. 5887–5896.

[24] B. Baker, “Emergent reciprocity and team formation from randomized
uncertain social preferences,” Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, vol. 33, pp. 15 786–15 799, 2020.

[25] H. Haeri, R. Ahmadzadeh, and K. Jerath, “Reward-sharing relational
networks in multi-agent reinforcement learning as a framework for
emergent behavior,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05886, 2022.

[26] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.

[27] A. Koul, “ma-gym: Collection of multi-agent environments based on

openai gym.” https://github.com/koulanurag/ma-gym, 2019.

