The 5 Iranian Conference on Renewable Energy & Distributed Generation (ICREDG2017) – University of Guilan 

A Multi-Agent Approach to Optimal Sizing of a 
Combined Heating and Power Microgrid  

Soheil Mohseni  
Department of Electrical Engineering, University Campus 2, 
University of Guilan  
Rasht, Iran 
soheilmohseni92@gmail.com 

Seyed Masoud Moghaddas Tafreshi  
Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of 
Engineering, University of Guilan 
Rasht, Iran 
tafreshi@guilan.ac.ir

Abstract—In this paper, a novel multi-agent based method is 
applied to the problem of optimal sizing of the components of an 
islanded combined heating and power residential microgrid such 
that  the  residential  power  and  heat  demands  and  hydrogen 
refilling  demands  of  the  fuel  cell  electric  vehicles  (FCEVs)  are 
is  assumed  that  the  proposed  multi  agent-based 
met.  It 
architecture  consists  of  five  different  agents,  namely  generation 
agent  (GA),  electrical  and  thermal  loads  agent  (LA),  FCEV 
refilling station agent (SA), control agent (CA), and design agent 
(DA) which are organized in three levels. Design agent (DA) is the 
main  agent  of  the  proposed  multi-agent  system  (MAS)  that  
according to its interactions with CA and by minimizing the total 
costs  of  the  system  through  particle  swarm  optimization  (PSO), 
finds the optimal sizes of the system’s components. This study is 
performed for a typical stand-alone combined heating and power 
microgrid. 

Keywords—renewable  energy;  microgrid;  micro-CHP;  optimal 

sizing; multi-agent system. 

I.   INTRODUCTION  

Sustainable  energy  systems  have  received  global  attention 
in  many  countries  according  to  the  depletion  of  fossil  fuels, 
global warming and climate change issues. Renewable energy 
sources  (RESs)  such  as  wind  and  solar  are  well  accepted 
sustainable  energy  sources  [1].  A  microgrid  is  a  low-voltage 
distribution  system  with  distributed  energy  resources,  storage 
devices, and controllable loads that are operated either islanded 
or connected to the main power grid in a controlled way. The 
steady  progress  in  the  development  of  distributed  power 
generation,  such  as  microgrids  and 
renewable  energy 
technologies,  are  opening  up  new  opportunities  for  the 
utilization of distributed energy resources [2].  

Optimal  sizing  of  hybrid  micro-combined  heat  and  power 
(CHP)  systems  defined  on  the  basis  of  linear  programming 
techniques have been addressed in [3] that takes advantage of 
rapid  calculations  even  in  the  presence  of  a  high  number  of 
variables.  The  optimal  design  of  microgrids  with  CHP 
generators, through the development of a mixed-integer linear 
programming (MILP) model has been addressed in [4] that has 
considered  both  environmental  and  economic  concerns.  A 
MILP-based  optimal  structural  design  model  of  residential 
power and heat supply devices has been developed in [5] that 
considers  the  operational  and  capital  recovery  constraints  of 

these devices. A decision model for the planning of the energy 
production  has  been  proposed  in  [6]  that  aims  to  find  the 
optimal sizes of the components of a smart district that satisfy 
its electrical and thermal demands. 

In  this  paper,  the  optimal  sizing  problem  of  a  combined 
heating and power residential microgrid is considered which is 
equipped  with  photovoltaic/wind  turbine/fuel  cell  generation, 
electrolyzer  and  hydrogen  storage,  boiler  and  heater,  and  a 
FCEV refilling station. For this purpose, a multi-agent system 
is proposed that finds  the  optimal  sizes  of the  components  by 
mean  of  particle  swarm  optimization  (PSO).  The  considered 
energy management strategy in the proposed MAS controls the 
refilling of FCEVs depending on the hour of the day to reduce 
cost and avoid overload during peak hours.  

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section II, 
configuration  of  the  microgrid  is  presented.  Section  III 
describes  the  multi-agent  architecture  used  for  optimal  sizing 
along  with  the  description  of  components  belonging  to  each 
agent. Section  IV presents the simulation results of the MAS-
based  architecture  used  for  optimal  sizing  of  the  microgrid. 
Finally, the conclusion of this study is presented in section V. 

II.  CONFIGURATION OF THE MICROGRID 

Power flow diagram of the proposed microgrid is shown in 
Fig.  1.  According  to  this  diagram,  the  output  power  of  the 
photovoltaic  unit  is  equal  to  PPV  that  depends  on  the  solar 
radiation and the output power of the wind generation unit is 
equal  to  Pwg  that  depends  on  the  wind  speed.  When  the 
summation  of  the  output  powers  of  PV  arrays  and  wind 
turbines  is  more  than  electricity  demand  (Pload),  the  first 
priority  of  using  this  surplus  power  (Pren-el)  is  producing 
hydrogen  in  the  electrolyzer  and  storing  the  hydrogen  in  the 
tank.  If  the  surplus  power  exceeds  electrolyzer’s  rated  power 
or  the  tank  becomes  full,  the  surplus  power  (Pren-h)  will  be 
used  for  heat  production  in  the  heater  to  supply  the  thermal 
load to the amount of Qh-tl. In this case, if there is shortage of 
heat  production,  boiler  compensates  it.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  the  summation  of  the  output  powers  of  the  PV  arrays 
and wind turbines is less than the electricity demand, fuel cell 
consumes  the  hydrogen  stored  in  the  tank  to  the  amount  of 
Ptank-fc and compensates the shortage of the power production 
(Pfc-conv).  If  the  shortage  of  power  exceeds  fuel  cell’s  rated 

 
 
 
power or the stored hydrogen cannot afford that, some fraction 
of the electricity demand of the microgrid must be shed which 
leads to loss of load. In this case, if the heat production of the 
fuel  cell  does  not  satisfy  the  thermal  load  (Qload),  boiler  will 
compensate the shortage of the heat production. Finally, if the 
power production of renewable sources  (PPV+Pwg) is equal  to 
the  electrical  load  demand,  all  of  the  renewable  generations 
will  be  delivered  to  the  electrical  loads  and  boiler  should 
satisfy the thermal loads. In all of these cases, FCEVs can be 
refilled  at  the  station  and  consume  the  hydrogen  power  of 
Ptank-sta. 

a) PV arrays: The output power of the PV generator can 

be calculated according to the following equation [7]: 

PPV g NPV Am Gt,                              (1) 

where g  is  the  instantaneous  PV  generator  efficiency  that  is 
considered  to  be  15.4%  in  this  paper  [7],  Am  is  the  area  of  a 
single module used in the system (m2) which is considered to 
be  1.9  m2  in  this  paper  [7],  Gt    is  the  total  global  irradiance 
incident on the titled plane (W/m2), and NPV  is the number of 
modules. In this analysis, each PV array has a rated power of 1 
kW.  The  capital  cost  of  1  unit  is  $2000  [7],  while  the 
replacement  and  maintenance  costs  are  taken  as  $1800,  and 
$0/yr,  respectively.  The  lifetime  of  a  PV  array  is  taken  to  be 
20 years [8]. 

b) Wind  turbine:  The  power  of  the  wind  turbine  (Pwg 

(kW/m2)) can be described in terms of wind speed by (2) [9]. 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the proposed microgrid system 

III.  MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM 

The  considered  MAS  for  optimal  sizing  of  the  proposed 
microgrid  has  five  agents,  namely  generation  agent,  electrical 
and  thermal  loads  agent,  refilling  station  agent,  control  agent, 
and  design  agent  which  are  organized  in  three  levels.  All  the 
agents  associated  with  the  generation  or  consumption  of 
electricity, heat, and hydrogen belong to the field level, which 
is the lowest level of the considered architecture for the MAS. 
GA, LA, and SA belong to this level. In the coordination level, 
coordination  of 
the  generation  of  electricity,  heat,  and 
hydrogen  with  consumption  of  the  electrical,  thermal,  and 
hydrogen loads obtains. CA belongs to this level. Design level 
is  the  highest  level  of  the  proposed  architecture  that  finds  the 
optimal  sizes  of  the  components  according  to  the  interactions 
with coordination level such that the residential power and heat 
demands, and FCEVs’ hydrogen refilling demands are met. In 
the proposed MAS, DA belongs to this level.  

A.  Generation agent 

 This agent is responsible for management of the resources 
of  the  microgrid.  Generation  resources  of  the  microgrid 
include PV arrays, wind turbines, and the fuel cell. Also, this 
agent has an electrolyzer to provide hydrogen for the fuel cell 
and uses a hydrogen tank as a storage unit.  

1)  Components under the supervision of generation agent: 
Modeling of the components which are under the supervision 
of generation agent is presented in the following subsections. 

where Vcin is the cut in wind speed (m/s) that is considered to 
be  2.5  m/s,  Vcoff    is  the  cut  off  wind  speed  (m/s)  that  is 
considered to  be 25 m/s, V is the wind speed  (m/s), Vr is the 
nominal  wind  speed  (m/s)  that  is  considered  to  be  11  m/s, 
Prated  is  the  nominal  power  of  wind  turbine  which  is 
considered to be 1 kW, Pwg-max is the maximum power of wind 
turbine,  Pwg-min  is  the  minimum  power  of  wind  turbine,  and 
Pfurl is the power of wind turbine in cut off wind speed. Actual 
power available from wind turbines is given by (3). 

Pwg(t)= w Nwg Aw Pw(t),                          (3) 

where w  is  the  efficiency  of  the  wind  turbine  generator  and 
corresponding  converters,  Nwg  is  the  number  of  wind  turbine 
generators, and Aw is the swept area. The capital cost of 1 unit 
is $1500 [7], while the replacement and maintenance costs are 
taken as $900, and $45/yr, respectively. The lifetime of a wind 
turbine is taken to be 20 years [8]. 

c) Fuel cell: Proton exchange membrane fuel cell is an 
environmentally  clean  power  generator  which  combines 
hydrogen  fuel  with  oxygen  from  air  to  produce  heat  and 
electricity.  The  efficiency  of  the  fuel  cell  is  fed  to  the 
computational  program  as  the  input.  Fuel  cell’s  power  and 
heat outputs can be defined by the following equations: 

Pfc-conv Ptank-fc  fc,el,                              (4)  

Qfc-tl  Ptank-fc  fc,th.                            (5) 

3maxmax0                                                        ,(()/())     ,      (2)()           cincoffwgcinrcincinrfurlrwgrrcoffcoffrVVVVPVVVVVVVPPPVVVVVVV 
where fc,el and fc,th are the electeical and thermal efficiencies 
of  the  fuel  cell  and  considered  to  be  40%  and  50%, 
respectively. The capital, replacement, and maintenance costs 
are taken as $2000 [7], $1500, and $100/yr for a 1 kW system, 
respectively. The FC’s lifetime is considered to be 5 years [8]. 
d) Electrolyzer:  Electrolysis  to  dissociate  water  into  its 
separate hydrogen and oxygen constituents has been in use for 
decades, primarily to meet industrial chemical needs. 

The  electrolyzer’s  output  power  can  be  calculated  by  the 

following equation: 

Pel-tank Pren-el  el,                           (6) 

In  this  analysis,  a  1  kW  system  is  associated  with  $1500 
capital  [7],  $1000  replacement,  and  $15/yr  maintenance  cost. 
The electrolyzer’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to be 
20 years and 75%, respectively [8]. 

e) Hydrogen tank: The energy of hydrogen stored in the 

tank at time step t is obtained by the following equation: 

Etank(t)Etank(t-1) Pel-tank(t) t  (Ptank-fc(t) + Ptank-sta(t))   
 storage t,                                                             (7) 

where storage  is the efficiency of the storage system which is 
assumed to be 95%, and t  is the duration of each time step 
which is equal to one hour in this study. 

To  calculate  the  mass  of  the  stored  hydrogen  in  the  tank, 

the following equation can be used [8]: 

mstorage(t) = Etank(t) / HHVH2,                       (8) 

where HHVH2  is the higher heating value of hydrogen which is 
equal to 39.7 kWh/kg [8]. It is worth mentioning that there are 
lower and upper limits for amount of the stored hydrogen. It is 
not  possible  that  the  mass  of  stored  hydrogen  exceeds  the 
rated capacity of the tank. On the other hand, because of some 
problems, e.g. hydrogen pressure drop, a small fraction of the 
hydrogen (here, 5%) may not be extracted. This fraction is the 
lower limit of the stored hydrogen.  

In  this  analysis,  a  1  kg  system  is  associated  with  $500 
capital  [7],  $450  replacement,  and  $5/yr  maintenance  cost. 
The hydrogen tank’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to 
be 20 years and 95%, respectively [8]. 

f)  Heater:  The  equipments  that  have  heating  elements 
are called heaters. In this analysis, heater is used for supplying 
the  heat  load  of  the  microgrid  when  there  is  surplus  power 
generation.  Heater’s  output  power  can  be  defined  by  the 
following equation: 

g) Boiler: It is assumed that boiler’s fuel is natural gas. 
Equation  (10)  shows  the  heat  output  of  the  boiler  based  on 
input fuel and (11) shows the cost of the input fuel per kWh. 

Qb-tl Cin  b,                              (10)    

Cboiler Cin Cfuel.                            (11)        

where b is the boiler’s efficiency, Cin is the input fuel of the 
boiler and Cfuel is the fuel cost which is equal to $0.03/kWh in 
this  study.  In  this  analysis,  a  1  kW  gas  boiler  is  associated 
with $85 capital [11], $60 replacement, and $2/yr maintenance 
cost. The boiler’s lifetime and efficiency are considered to be 
15 years and 94%, respectively [11].                                         

h)  DC/AC converter: The power electronic circuit used 
to convert DC into AC is known as inverter. In this analysis, a 
1  kW  system  is  associated  with  $700  capital  [7],  $650 
replacement,  and  $7/yr  maintenance  cost.  The  converter’s 
lifetime and efficiency are considered to be 15 years and 90%, 
respectively [8]. 

2)  Simulation  algorithm  of  the  generation  agent:  This 
agent, by coordination of the control agent, interacts with LA 
and  SA  in  order  to  supply  the  electricity,  thermal,  and 
hydrogen demands. In this regard, first CA sends the sizes of 
PV  arrays,  wind  turbines,  electrolyzer,  hydrogen  tank,  fuel 
cell, boiler, heater, and DC/AC converter that are determined 
by  the  DA,  to  the  GA  and  at  each  time  step  t  asks  it  for  the 
next  hour  value  of  the  output  power  of  solar  and  wind 
generations. Then, GA sends the requested data to the CA. In 
this  paper,  it  is  assumed  that  GA  acts  such  that  when  it 
receives the request of storing the surplus power from the CA, 
it  will  use  the  excess  energy  in  electrolyzer  and  stores  the 
produced  hydrogen  in  the  tank.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the 
GA receives the request of supplying the shortage of electrical 
power production from the CA, it uses the stored hydrogen in 
the  fuel  cell  to  compensate  the  shortage  of  the  power 
production. Also, when it receives the request of supplying the 
shortage of thermal load, it turns the boiler on. 

B.  Electical and Thermal loads agent 

 Electrical and thermal loads agent is a simple reflex agent 
that aggregates all the electricity and heat consumptions of the 
residential  loads.  The  electrical  loads  that  LA  is  responsible 
for  forecasting  them  are  interruptible  (Pi)  and  uninterruptible 
(Puni)  loads  and  should  be  supplied  subject  to  a  reliability 
constraint.  It  is  assumed  that  at  each  hour,  15%  of  loads  are 
interruptible and 85% of them are uninterruptible.  

Qh-tl Pren-h  h.                               (9) 

C.  FCEV refilling station agent 

where h  is  the  efficiency  of  the  heater.  In  this  analysis,  a  1 
kW  system  is  associated  with  $281  capital  [10],  $150 
replacement, and $5/yr maintenance cost. The heater’s lifetime 
and  efficiency  are  considered  to  be  20  years  and  90%, 
respectively [10].      

Refilling  station  agent  is  responsible  for  refilling  the 
FCEVs  that  arrive  at  the  station  and  sends  the  forecasted 
refilling demand to the control agent.  In this paper, hydrogen 
pipeline  transport  is  used  to  deliver  hydrogen  from  the 
hydrogen  tank  of  the  GA  to  the  station.  The  next  stage  is  to 
compress  the  hydrogen  from  1  bar  to  700  bar  and  pump  the 

 
gas  to  storage  vessels  for  delivery  to  the  fuel  pump.  FCEVs 
are designed to accept 350 or 700 bar with the greater pressure 
adding to the cost per kg. Therefore, a hydrogen compressor is 
needed  at  the  station.  Also,  in  order  to  fuel  700  bar  fuel  cell 
vehicles, a hydrogen dispenser is needed.  

In  this  study,  Pure  Energy  Centre’s  hydrogen  compressor 
and  dispenser  are  used  to  achieve  the  700  bar  hydrogen 
needed  for  refilling  the  FCEVs.  This  compressor  has  the 
maximum  power  of  200  kW  which  is  enough  for  supplying 
the FCEVs that arrive at the station. It is assumed that the size 
of  hydrogen  compressor-dispenser  system  is  fixed  and  does 
not participate in the optimal sizing problem. The capital cost 
of  this  system  is  $100,000  [12],  while  the  replacement  and 
maintenance  costs  are 
taken  as  $80,000  and  $200/yr, 
respectively.  The  lifetime  and  efficiency  of  this  system  are 
considered to be 20 years and 49%, respectively [13]. 

1)  Modeling  of  FCEVs:  In  this  paper,  Toyota  Mirai  is 
chosen  as  a  mid-size  sedan  FCEV  which  is  manufactured  by 
Toyota.  Mirai  is  equipped  with  a  113  kW  fuel  cell-powered 
electric  motor  and  two hydrogen  tanks with  a  three-layer 
structure  made  of carbon  fiber-reinforced  plastic consisting 
of nylon 6 from Ube Industries, and other materials. The tanks 
store  hydrogen  at  700  bar  and  have  a  combined  weight  of 
87.5 kg and 5 kg capacity. The Mirai refueling takes between 
3 and 5 minutes and Toyota has expected a total range of 300 
miles on a full tank. 

2)  Simulation algorithm of the station agent: It is assumed 
that unmanaged refilling profile of the station is available for a 
year and FCEVs can be managed to be refilled in the evening 
and  night-time  off-peak  hours,  thereby  the  total  cost  of  the 
microgrid reduces. This method is such that at each step time 
t, the SA sends the hydrogen demand to the CA and when it 
receives  the  request  of  the  reduction  of  the  demand  from  the 
CA, it calculates the deferrable hydrogen loads and adds them 
to  the next  hour demand and then sends the updated demand 
of the tth hour to the CA. Also, if it cannot refill some of the 
FCEVs  by  the  allocated  hydrogen  power  of  the  CA,  it  sends 
the information of unsupplied hydrogen demand to the CA.  

D.  Control agent 

Control  agent  coordinates  the  interactions  between  the 
generation  agent  and  electrical  and  thermal  loads  agent  and 
station  agent.  This  agent,  after  receiving  a  request  for 
operating  the  microgrid  with  determined  sizes  from  DA  and 
sending the related sizes to the GA and SA, at each time step t, 
requests  GA  for  the  next  hour  solar  and  wind  power 
productions,  requests  LA  for  the  next  hour  electricity  and 
thermal demands, and requests SA for the next hour hydrogen 
demand  needed  for  refilling  the  FCEVs.  After  receiving  the 
information  on  the  operation  of  the  generation  and  storage 
components  of  the  microgrid  from  the  GA,  it  establishes  the 
energy management strategy that is presented in section II and 
when  it  finds  that  some  of  the  electrical  loads  should  be 
interrupted  for  balancing  the  generation  and  demand,  it 
interrupts  them  and  when  it  finds  that  some  of  the  hydrogen 

loads  can  be  deferred  to  the  evening  and  night-time  off-peak 
hours,  it  manages  them  to  be  refilled  at  those  hours.  Finally, 
CA sends the information on the operation of the microgrid to 
the DA. 

E.  Design  agent 

Design  agent  is  responsible  for  optimal  sizing  of  the 

components of the microgrid.  

1)  System’s  cost:  In  this  paper  the  capital,  replacement, 
and  maintenance  costs  of  each  component  of  the  microgrid 
have been considered and net present cost (NPC) is chosen for 
the  calculation  of  the  system’s  cost.  The  NPC  for  a  specific 
device can be expressed by the following equation: 

NPCi  Ni  (CCi+RCi  Ki + MCi  PWA(ir,R)),     (12) 

where: 

N 

Number of units and/or the unit capacity (kW or kg) 

CC 

Capital investment cost ($/unit) 

K 

Single payment present worth 

RC 

Replacement cost ($/unit) 

MC  Maintenance and repair cost ($/unit.yr) 

PWA  Present worth annual payment 

ir 

R 

Real interest rate (6%) 

Project lifetime (20 years) 

2)  The objective function: The objective function is sum of 

all net present costs:  

NPC = NPCPV + NPCWT +NPCel + NPCtank + NPCFC + 
NPCboiler+ NPCheater + NPCconv + NPCsta + NPCem + 

NPCfuel+NPCPi+NPCPuni+NPCQ+NPCh,        (13) 

loads, 

thermal 

where  NPCPi,  NPCPuni,  NPCQ,  and  NPCh  are  the  NPCs  of 
interrupting  the  interruptible  electrical  loads,  uninterruptible 
electrical 
loads, 
respectively. It is worth mentioning that the penalty factors for 
unsupplied  uninterruptible  electrical  loads  and  thermal  loads 
are  considered  to  be  5.6  $/kWh  and  the  penalty  factors  for 
unsupplied  interruptible  electrical  loads  and  hydrogen  loads 
are considered to be 0.56 $/kWh. 

loads,  and  hydrogen 

3)  Reliability:  In  order  to  evaluate  the  reliability  of 
supplying the electrical and thermal loads of the microgrid, the 
equivalent  loss  factor  (ELF)  index  is  used  and  these  indices 
can be calculated by the following equations: 

ELFel = 

( 

/ Puni(t)),           (14) 

ELFth = 

( 

/ Q (t)),             (15) 

87601.t_()UnsuniPt87601.t()UnsQtIn obtaining the hydrogen load curve of the FCEV station, 
it  is  assumed  that  there  are  150  FCEVs  in  the  microgrid  that 
should be refilled two times in a week.  

Fig. 2. Annual sun irradiance 

where 

  and 

indicate 

the  unsupplied 

uninterruptible electrical loads and unsupplied thermal loads at 
time step t, respectively. 

4)  Emission cost: Emission cost function can be calculated 

by the following equation [14]: 

    (16)  

where k is the externality costs of emission type k, EFik is the 
emission factor of generation unit i and emission type k, N is 
the  number  of  generation  units  and  M  is  the  emission  type 
(NOx, CO2 or SO2). Externality costs and emission factors of 
the boiler are shown in Table I [14].  

TABLE I.  

EXTERNALITY COSTS AND EMISSION FACTORS           

Emission 
type 

Externality 
costs ($/lb) 

Emission factors 
of the boiler 
(lb/MWh) 

NOX 
SO2 
CO2 

4.2 
0.99 
0.014 

5.06 
11.9 
1965 

5)  fuel cost: Net present cost of the input fuel of the boiler 

can be calculated according to the following equation: 

      (17) 

The  considered  annual  electrical  and  thermal  load  curves 

are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, respectively. 

Fig. 3. Annual wind speed 

6)  Simulation  algorithm  of  the  design  agent:  After  the 
determination of the sizes of the components through PSO by 
this agent, the determined sizes of the components will be sent 
to the CA. Accordingly, CA sends the determined sizes of the 
components to the GA. Then, CA coordinates the GA with LA 
and  SA  and  sends  the  information  on  the  operation  of  the 
microgrid  to  the  DA.  After  receiving  this  information,  DA 
calculates the objective function and ELF indices. If ELFel and 
ELFth are less than 0.01, and the energy content of the tank at 
the  end  of  a  year  is  not  less  than  its  initial  amount,  then  DA 
selects the obtained sizes as optimum sizes. 

IV.  SIMULATION RESULTS 

In  this  section,  the  proposed  MAS-based  architecture  for 
optimal  sizing  of  the  components  of  the  proposed  islanded 
combined  heating  and  power  microgrid  is  simulated  and  the 
optimum  combination  of  the  components  is  calculated.  The 
simulation  of 
is  performed  using 
MATLAB software.  

the  proposed  MAS 

The  annual  solar  radiation  and  wind  speed  data  that  have 
been considered in the simulation program are shown in Fig. 2 
and  Fig.  3,  respectively.  It  is  obvious  that  sun  irradiance  is 
equal to zero at nights but because of the scale of the figure, it 
cannot be seen in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 4. Annual electrical load curve of the microgrid 

Fig. 5. Annual thermal load curve of the microgrid 

_()UnsuniPt()UnsQt8760111(,)(),NMemkikitikNPCPWAirREFP87601()(,).boilerfuelfueltboilerQtNPCPWAirRC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simulations  are  done  in  two  scenarios.  In  scenario1, 
electrical  and  hydrogen  demands  of  the  microgrid  are 
considered  as  fixed  loads  and  the  MAS  is  simulated  without 
controlling  them.  In  scenario2,  it  is  assumed  that  the 
considered energy management strategy in the proposed MAS 
controls  the  supplying  of  the  interruptible  loads  and  refilling 
of the FCEVs depending on the hour of the day. 

the amounts of pollution penalties that the boiler is responsible 
for  them  decrease  significantly.  The  reason  of  the  decreased 
capacity  of  the  fuel  cell  and  converter  is  that  in  the  second 
scenario,  it  is  assumed  that  15%  of  the  electrical  loads  are 
interruptible  at  each  hour.  Moreover,  the  capacity  of  the 
hydrogen  tank  does  not  change  very  much  and  the  proposed 
energy management strategy has not affected its size. 

A.  Scenario1:  In  this  scenario,  hydrogen  refilling  demand  is 
considered as a fixed load and all of the electric loads are 
uninterruptible  loads.  Results  of  optimal  sizing  problem 
through the MAS in this case are shown in Table II. In this 
scenario, the total cost is equal to $36,547,871. 

TABLE II.  

OPTIMAL SIZES OF THE COMPONENTS IN SCENARIO1 

PV 

WT 

2851 
Fuel cell 
(kW) 
389.07 

232 
DC/AC 
 (kW) 
391.43 

Electrolyzer  
(kW) 

Tank 
 (kg) 

1391 
Boiler 
 (kW) 
254.32 

1563.03 
Heater 
(kW) 
31.87 

B.  Scenario2:  In  this  scenario,  hydrogen  refilling  demand  is 
considered  as  a  deferrable  load  and  at  each  hour,  15%  of 
the  electrical  loads  are  considered  as  interruptible  loads. 
Results of optimal sizing problem through the MAS in this 
case are shown in Table III. In this scenario, the total cost 
is equal to $34,911,246. 

TABLE III.  

OPTIMAL SIZES OF THE COMPONENTS IN SCENARIO2 

PV 

WT 

2593 
Fuel cell 
(kW) 
312.55 

308 
DC/AC 
 (kW) 
329.76 

Electrolyzer  
(kW) 

Tank 
 (kg) 

1498 
Boiler 
 (kW) 
98.30 

1529.74 
Heater 
(kW) 
179.22 

Results  show  that  using  the  proposed  deferrable  refilling  
method  and  benefitting  from  the  potential  of  interruptible 
loads in the MAS, decreases the optimal size of PVs, fuel cell, 
converter,  and  boiler  and  increases  the  optimal  size  of  the 
WTs,  electrolyzer,  and  heater,  which  in  turn  decreases  the 
total cost of the system. This is because of that the summation 
of the costs of reduced number of PVs, decreased capacity of 
fuel  cell,  converter,  and  boiler,  and  decreased  amounts  of 
pollution penalties is more than the summation of the costs of 
added WTs and higher capacity electrolyzer and heater. In the 
proposed  MAS,  the  reason  behind  decreasing  the  number  of 
PVs  is  that  it  uses  a  control  strategy  that  avoids  overload 
during peak hours, the reason behind increasing the number of 
WTs is that the majority of the FCEVs are going to be charged 
in  the  evening  and  night-time  off-peak  hours  when  solar 
energy  is  not  available.  Furthermore,  the  reason  behind 
increasing  the  capacity  of  the  heater  and  decreasing  the 
capacity  of  the  boiler  is  that  by  interrupting  some  of  the 
electrical  loads  and  deferring  the  refilling  of  the  FCEVs,  it 
would  be  possible  to  use  the  surplus  power  of  the  PVs  and 
WTs for supplying the thermal loads by heater and therefore, 

V.  CONCLUSION 

In this paper, a multi-agent system for optimal sizing of an 
islanded  combined  heating  and  power  microgrid  has  been 
developed.  It  is  observed  that  according  to  the  considered 
energy  management  strategy  in  the  proposed  MAS  and 
interrupting  some  of  the  electrical  loads  and  deferring  the 
refilling  of  the  FCEVs’  tanks,  overloading  can  be  avoided, 
available  components  can  be  utilized  better  and  therefore,  a 
lower NPC for a 20 year investment horizon achieves. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  U. K. Debnath, I. Ahmad, D. Habibi, and A. Y. Saber, “Energy storage 
model  with  gridable  vehicles  for  economic  load  dispatch  in  the  smart 
grid,”  Electrical  Power  and  Energy  Systems,  vol.  64,  pp.  1017-1024, 
2015. 

[2]  H.  Hassanzadehfard,  S.  M.  Moghaddas-Tafreshi,  and  S.  M.  Hakimi, 
“Optimization  of  grid  connected  micro-grid  consisting  of  PV/FC/UC 
with  considered  frequency  control,”  Turkish  Journal  of  Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Sciences, vol.  23, pp. 1-16, 2015. 

[3]  C. Brandoni and M. Renzi, “Optimal sizing of hybrid solar micro-CHP 
systems  for  the  household  sector,”  Applied  Thermal  Engineering,  vol. 
75, pp. 896-907, 2015. 

[4]  D. Zhang, S. Evangelisti, P. Lettieri, and L. G. Papageorgiou, “Optimal 
design  of    CHP-based  microgrid:Multiobjective  optimisation  and  life 
cycle assessment,” Energy, vol. 85, pp. 181-193, 2015. 

[5]  T. Wakui, H. Kawayoshi, and R. Yokoyama, “Optimal structural design 
of  residential  power  and  heat  supply  devices  in  consideration  of 
operational and capital recovery constraints,” Applied Energy, vol. 163, 
pp. 118-133, 2016. 

[6]  S.  Bracco,  F.  Delfino,  M.  Rossi,  M.  Robba,  and  L.  Pagnini,  “Optimal 
planning  of  the  energy  production  mix  in  smart  districts  including 
renewable  and  cogeneration  power  plants,”  in  Proceedings  of  2016 
IEEE International Smaty Cities Conference, Trento, Italy, Sept. 2016. 

system 

[7]  M.  Smaoui,  A.  Abdelkafi,  and  L.  Krichen,  “Optimal  sizing  of  a  stand-
a 

alone  photovoltaic/wind/hydrogen  hybrid 
desalination unit,” Solar Energy, vol. 120, pp. 263-276,  Oct. 2015. 
[8]  S. Dehghan, B. Kiani, A. Kazemi, and A. Parizad, “Optimal sizing of a 
hybrid  wind/PV  plant  considering  reliability  indices,”  World  Academy 
of Science, Eng. and Technology, vol. 56, pp. 527-535, Aug. 2009. 
[9]  M. J. Khan and M. T. Iqbal, “Pre-feasibility study of stand-alone hybrid 
energy systems for applications in Newfoundland,” vol. 30, pp. 835-854, 
May 2005. 

supplying 

[10]  A.  Lekov,  V.  Franco,  S.  Meyers,  L.  Thompson,  and  V.  Letschert, 
“Energy  Efficiency  Design  Options  for  Residential  Water  Heaters: 
Economic  Impacts  on  Consumers,”  ASHRAE  Transactions,  vol.  117, 
pp. 103-110, 2011. 

[11]  [Online]. Available: http:// www.nera.com 
[12]  [Online]. Available: http:// www. pureenergycentre.com 
[13]  DOE  Hydrogen  and  Fuel  Cells  Program  Record,  Energy  requirements 
for  hydrogen  gas  compression  and  liquefacation  as  related  to  vehicle 
storage needs (U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 2009) 
[14]  F. A. Mohamed, H. N. Koivo, “ System Modelling and Online Optimal 
Management  of  Microgrid  Using  Mesh  Adaptive  Direct  Search,” 
Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol. 32, pp. 398-407, 2010. 

 
 
 
