In Challenges and Achievements in e-business and e-work,
B. Stanford-Smith, E. Chiozza, and M. Edin (eds.),
Prague, Czech Republic, IOS Press, October 2002, pp.757-764

An Agent Framework for Dynamic Agent 
Retraining: Agent Academy 
P. Mitkas1, A. Symeonidis1, D. Kechagias1, I. Athanasiadis1,  
G. Laleci2, G. Kurt2, Y. Kabak 2, A. Acar2, A. Dogac2  
1 Intelligent Systems and Software Engineering Laboratory, ITI, CERTH, 1 st km Thermi (cid:150) Panorama Road, 
 P.O. Box 361, GR 570 01 Thermi Thessaloniki, Greece Tel: +30 310 996349 mitkas@vergina.eng.auth.gr 
2 Software Research and Development Center, Middle East Technical University, Inonu Bulvari, 
METU(ODTU) Campus, 06500, Ankara, Turkey Tel:+90 312 2105598 asuman@srdc.metu.edu.tr 

Abstract. Agent Academy (AA) aims to develop a multi-agent society that can train 
new agents for specific or general tasks, while constantly retraining existing agents 
in  a  recursive  mode.  The  system  is  based  on  collecting  information  both  from  the 
environment  and 
related 
successes/failures  to  generate a body of data, stored in the Agent Use Repository, 
which  is  mined  by  the  Data  Miner  module,  in  order  to  generate  useful  knowledge 
about the application domain. Knowledge extracted by the Data Miner is used by the 
Agent Training Module as to train new agents or to enhance the behavior of agents 
already running. 

the  acting  agents  and 

the  behaviors  of 

their 

In  this  paper  the  Agent  Academy  framework  is  introduced,  and  its  overall 
architecture  and  functionality  are  presented.  Training  issues  as  well  as  agent 
ontologies  are  discussed.  Finally,  a  scenario, which aims to provide environmental 
alerts to both individuals and public authorities, is described an AA-based use case.  

1. Introduction 

In  the  recent  years  agent  technology  has  found  many  interesting  applications  in  e-
commerce,  decision  support  systems  and  Internet  applications.  Several  agent  system 
building  tools  and  frameworks  have  been  developed.  The  feature  lacking  so  far,  though,  is 
the  ability  to  store,  analyze  and  learn  from  the  past  activities  of  the  agent  society  as  a  whole 
in  order  to  dynamically  re-train  individual  agents  at  run-time.  In  this  way  functionally 
unrelated  agents  within  the  society  may  benefit  from  each  other(cid:146)s  findings  and  be  able  to 
collectively  exploit  the  shared  knowledge  base  thereby  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  the 
system.  We  claim  that  such  a  society-wide  evaluation  and  constant  learning  approach  is 
essential  for  describing  complex  and  ultimately  useful  scenarios  involving  agents  with 
different  roles.  In  this  paper,  we  provide  the  description  of  a  framework  capable of the said 
functionality  which 
the  scope  of  IST-2000-31050  Agent 
Academy  Project.  The  features  of  the  proposed  system  are  explained  over  a  motivating 
scenario. 

is  being  developed  within 

Agents  have  proven  to  be  particularly  useful  in  a  series  of  business  applications.  In 
particular,  agents  have  facilitated  the  procedure  of  buying  and  selling  of  goods  and  services 
in  electronic  marketplaces,  the  handling  of  workflows  and  have  assisted  in  personalization 
by  managing  user  profiles  or  by  tackling  production  planning.  As  the  benefits  from  using 
agent  societies  in  such  applications  become  clear,  so  does  the  need  for  development  of 
high-level agent system-building tools.  

There  are  numerous  agent  development  platforms  with  various  degrees  of  abstraction 
and  completeness  ranging  from  bare  bones  API’s  to  full-fledged  but  less  flexible  building 
packages.  These  frameworks  all  have  their  strong  points  and  lacking  features,  the  most 
important  factors  being  compliance  to  a  specification  (e.g.  FIPA),  support  for  the  mobility 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of  the  agents  from  host  to  host,  ability  to  support  AI  oriented  languages  (e.g.  Lisp,  JESS, 
etc.),  support  for 
lightweight  agents,  support  for  advanced  planning-scheduling  and 
combinations  thereof.  The  feature  lacking  so  far  however  is  the  ability  to  get  feedback  from 
improve  agents(cid:146) 
an  agent  society,  which  will  be  analyzed 
intelligence at run-time. The Agent Academy Project aims to fill in this void. 

to  dynamically 

in  order 

2. The Agent Academy Framework 

Agent  Academy  aims  to  develop  a  multi-agent  system,  which  can  train  new  agents  for 
specific  or  general  tasks  and  re-train  its  own  agents  in  a  recursive  mode.  The  main 
components  of  the  system  are  given  in  Figure  1.  The  system  is  based  on  collecting 
information  from  both  the  environment  and  the  behaviors  of  the  acting  agents  and  their 
related  successes/failures  to  generate  a  body  of  data.  Then  this  body  of  data  is  mined 
through  the  Data  Miner  in  order  to  discover  the  important  relationships  between  the 
behaviors  of  the  agents  and  their  environment.  These  relationships  discovered  by  the  Data 
Miner  are  used  by  the  training  module,  in  order  to  train  new  agents  or  to  retrain  (i.e. 
enhance) the agents already running. 

      WEB 

Agent 
Tracking 
Data 

User 
Profile 

Agent 
Request 

Agent Academy 

n
o
i
t
i
s
i
u
q
c
A
a
t
a
D

Agent 
Use 
Repository 

Data  
Miner 

Agent 
Factory 

Agent 
Training 

Figure 1 Overall Architecture of the Agent Academy System 

Intelligent 
Agent 

The four main components of the Agent Academy framework are described below. 
Agent  Factory  (AF):  The  Agent  Factory  is  assigned  with  the  creation  of  new 
(untrained)  agents.  User  defines  through  an  interface  new  agent(cid:146)s  parameters,  such  as 
functional  characteristics,  abilities  to  access  entities  or  devices,  etc.  The  AF  initializes  all 
agents of the community according to user requests. 

Agent  Use  Repository  (AUR):  The  Agent  Use  Repository  is  a  database  holding  all 
necessary  data  for  a  specific  application.  This  body  of  data  consists  of  agent  behaviors, 
experience  and  decisions,  as  well  as  of  information  on  the  working  environment  and  its 
parameters.  AUR  is  constantly  updated  and  appended  with  information  via  the  Data 
Acquisition Module, which monitors and posts data from the operating agents. 

Data  Mining  Module  (DM):    Through  the  data  mining  module  a  user  can  take 
advantage  of  data  mining  techniques  after  applying  them  to  the  body  of  application  data. 
Results  of  the  data  mining  process  (in  the  form  of  decision  trees,  association  rules  and/or 
artificial  neural  networks)  are  posted  to  the  ATM  in  FIPA-SL  format,  to  be  transplanted 
into active agents. 

Agent  Training  Module  (ATM):  The  Agent  Training  Module  is  charged  with  the  task 
of  embedding  behaviors  and  beliefs  to  working  agents.  In  this  manner  it  is  the  tool  for 
initially training new agents and for retraining AA produced active agents. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
3.  The Overall Architecture of the System 

to 

implement 

the  AA  framework  using 

We  decided 
the  Java  Agent  Development 
Environment  (JADE)  [1],  which  is  a  FIPA  compliant  Agent  Development  Toolkit.  Another 
important  step  of  the  design  concerning  an  agent  based  infrastructure  is  the  setting  of  an 
Agent  Communication  Language,  to  allow  the  community  agents  to  exchange  information 
and  services  with  one  another,  for  negotiating,  reasoning  or  co-operation.  In  the  Agent 
Academy  Framework  we  use  FIPA-ACL  (FIPA  Agent  Communication  Language).  In  order 
to  be  fully  FIPA  compliant, 
the  Agent  Communication  Language 
message  should  be  represented  as  a  consistent  content  expression  with  one  of  the  content 
languages  in  the  FIPA  Content  Language  Library  [3],  which  are  FIPA-SL  (FIPA-Semantic 
(FIPA-
Language),  FIPA-RDF 
Knowledge  Interchange  Format),  and  FIPA-CCL  (FIPA-Constraint  Choice  Language). 
Agent  Academy  uses  FIPA-SL  [5],  which  is  supported  by  JADE,  as  a  content  language  to 
represent the information in ACL messages.   

(FIPA-Resource  Description  Framework),  FIPA-KIF 

information 

the 

in 

Another  important  issue  about  agent  communication  is  the  Ontology  concept.  The 
model  of  agent  communication  in  FIPA  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  two  agents,  who 
wish  to  converse,  share  a  common  ontology  for  the  domain  of  discourse.  It  ensures  that  the 
agents  ascribe  the  same  meaning  to  the  symbols  used  in  the  message.  Java  Agent 
Development  Environment  (JADE)  provides  a  platform  for  easy  exchange  and  parsing  of 
these  messages  into  internal  representations  of  the  agent  by  supporting  ontology  definitions 
consistent  with  the  content  language  of  the  messages.  Ontologies  are  defined  as  Java 
objects  representing  the  internal  structure  of  the  message,  and  provide  methods  to  retrieve 
the  necessary  parts  of  the  message  content.  When  an  agent  receives  a  Semantic  Language 
(SL)  message,  which  is  in  string  format,  it  is  parsed  in  to  Java  objects,  and  then  checked 
with  the  previously  defined  ontologies.  Then  the  agent  extracts  the  components  of  the 
message  by  using  the  methods  of  the  ontology.  When  sending  a  message,  the  agent 
constructs  and  initiates  the  necessary  java  objects  and  with  the  help  of  the  content  language 
support  of  JADE,  the  Semantic  Language  (SL)  message  in  string  format  is  constructed 
automatically.  

In  the  following,  the  internal  structure  of  the  Agent  Academy  Framework  is  presented 
with  the  message  structures  in  SL  between  the  components.  The  scenario  begins  with  a 
request  to  the  Agent  Factory  (AF)  for  creating  an  agent.  AF  creates  an  untrained  agent 
to  communicate  with  other  agents,  adding  new 
(UA)  with 
behaviors  to  itself,  being  mobile  if  necessary.  Then  it  sends  a  message  to  the  Agent 
Training Module (ATM) giving the name and the type of the agent as shown in Table 1. 
Table 1 Agent Factory (AF)-Agent Training Module (ATM) interaction in SL format 

the  preliminary  abilities 

 (agentsToBeTrained 

(agents (set (agent :name agent1 

               :type locationAgent)))) 

Upon  receiving  the  message  from  Agent  Factory,  Agent  Training  Module  discovers  the 
necessary  agent  behaviors,  which  comes  from  the  preferences  of  the  user  who  requests  the 
agent.  ATM  informs  the  Untrained  Agent  about  these  behaviors,  which  has  the  ability  to 
load itself with new behaviors, with the message format presented in Table 2. 

Table 2 Agent Training Module - Untrained Agent interaction in Semantic Language (SL) Format 

 (loadClass  

    (behaviors (set  (behavior :classname Class1) 

              (behavior :classname Class2)))) 

In  the  Agent  Academy  Framework,  the  Untrained  Agent  that  is  trained  by  the  Agent 
Training  Module  gains  the  ability  to  execute  rules  and  perform  reactive  actions  compatible 
with  scenario-specific  roles,  as  a  result  of  these  rules.  While  the  agent  performs  its  goals 
throughout  its  lifecycle,  Data  Acquisition  Module  collects  statistical  data,  about  the  agent(cid:146)s 
behavior,  successes  or  failures  and  updates  the  Agent  Use  Repository  accordingly  (e.g. 

 
 
some  rules  are  retracted,  some  new  ones  are  added).  Data  Miner  periodically  imports  data 
from  the  Agent  Use  Repository  in  order  to  generate  associations,  categorizations  and 
sequences  by  using  well-known  Data  Mining  techniques,  and  outputs  Decision  Trees, 
Association  Rules  or  Neural  networks.  These  outputs  are  passed  to  the  Agent  Training 
Module  to  be  taught  to  the  agents  that  are  executing  in  their  environment.  To  pass  these 
data structures, we defined SL representation formats for each of them.  

The  Agent  Training  Module  re-inserts  these  enhanced  rules  to  the  both  newly  created 

untrained agents and to the existing agents to train them.  

To  be  able  to  execute  the  rules  and  perform  reactive  actions  accordingly,  a  rule  engine  is 
necessary.  In  our  framework  we  are  using  Java  Expert  Systems  Shell  (JESS)  [2]  as  the  rule 
engine.  The  beliefs  of  the  agents  are  represented  as  JESS  rules,  and  when  a  new  fact 
coming  from  the  environment  is  asserted  to  the  agent,  these  JESS  rules  are  executed 
automatically  and  the  action  that  is  defined  to  be  the  result  of  this  condition  is  executed. 
The  agents  created  by  Agent  Factory  gain  the  ability  to  execute  JESS  rules  after  an  initial 
training  by  the  Agent  Training  Module.  The  ATM,  after  having  received  the  refined  rules 
from  the  Data  Mining  Module  as  decision  trees,  neural  networks,  association  rules  etc, 
converts  them  into  to  JESS  rules  and  sends  them  to  the  agents  to  be  trained,  in  the  message 
format presented in Table 3. 

Table 3 Semantic Language (SL) representation for the message format between ATM and Agent 

 (addRule (jessRules (set    (jessRule  :rule (cid:147)(defrule rule_6 (and (ozone normal)) => (store ALARM_TYPE 3))(cid:148)) 

  (jessRule :rule (cid:147)(defrule rule_5 (and (NO2NO3 normal)) => (store ALARM_TYPE 2))(cid:148))))) 

Operating  with  the  new  rules  sent  by  the  Agent  Training  Module  (ATM),  behavior  of 

the agents would be enhanced in an iterative and recursive manner. 

In 

the  Agent  Academy  Framework,  different  scenarios  can  be  implemented  with 
different  domain  specific  ontologies.  For  each  ontology,  there  will  be  different  databases  in 
the  Agent  Use  Repository.  The  field  names  of  the  databases  correspond  to  the  ontology 
term  that  the  agent  is  internally  using.  Therefore  the  Data  Miner  needs  to  know  on  which 
ontology  term  to  data  mine.  For  example,  in  the  O3RTAA  scenario  (described  in  Section 
4),  the  ontology  terms  are  pressure,  ozone,  nitrogen,  alarm  type  and  location.  The  attributes 
and  the  selection  conditions  that  the  Data  Miner  (DM)  will  consider  and  the  attributes  that 
the Agent uses should match syntactically.  

One  solution  for  the  ontology  problem  is  to  define  the  ontology  among  the  agents,  which 
should  be  common  as  well  as  determined,  prior  to  conducting  the  training  protocol,  while 
the  agents  are  being  created.  Then  the  exchanged  messages  carrying  the  artificial  neural 
network,  the  decision  trees  and  other  structures  should  also  be  constructed  accordingly, 
agreeing  on  the  common  ontology  of  the  scenario.  The  input  and  output  of  the  data 
structures  in  the  messages  exchanged  between  the  Artificial  Neural  Network  and  the  Data 
the 
Miner  Module  should  agree  with 
communicating  agents  use  the  same  predefined  ontology,  the  agents  ascribe  the  same 
meaning to the symbols used in the message.  

the  ontology.  Since  both  of 

terms  of 

the 

Another  solution  is  to  enable  the  agents  to  manage  explicit,  declaratively  represented 
different  ontologies.  An  ontology  service  for  a  community  of  agents  can  be  specified  for 
this  purpose.  A  dedicated  agent,  called  Ontology  Agent,  can  provide  this  service.  The  role 
of the Ontology Agent can be summarized as follows [4]: 

?? discovery of public ontologies in order to access them,  
?? maintain  a  set  of  public  ontologies  (i.e.  register  with  the  Directory  Facilitator  of 

FIPA, upload, download, and modify), 

?? translate expressions between different ontologies and/or different content languages, 
?? respond to query for relationships between terms or between ontologies, and,  
?? facilitate  the  identification  of  a  shared  ontology  for  communication  between  two 

agents.  

With  the  help  of  the  Ontology  Agent,  agents  do  not  have  to  agree  on  a  predefined 

ontology,  but  mappings  between  different  ontologies  can  be  provided  by  the  Ontology 
Agent.  Consider  an  agent  getting  the  message  that  contains  the  term  (cid:147)pressure(cid:148)  and  can  not 
understand  it  since  it  is  using  the  DomainSpecificOntology    (cid:147)O3RTAATurkish(cid:148),  whereas 
the  sender  agent  is  using  the  DomainSpecificOntology    (cid:147)O3RTAAEnglish(cid:148).  The  agent  can 
contact  the  Ontology  Agent,  asking  the  meaning  of  (cid:147)pressure(cid:148)  in  (cid:147)O3RTAATurkish(cid:148).  The 
agent  can  achieve  this  by  sending  a  Semantic  Language  (SL)  message  to  the  Ontology 
agent in the following format: 

(ontologyQuery  (map    :MessageOntology O3RTAAEnglish :MyOntology O3RTAATurkish 

:term pressure)) 

Then the ontology agent should inform the agent with the following SL message: 
(Mapping  (From :term (cid:147)pressure(cid:148))  (To :term (cid:147)basinc(cid:148))) 

As  a  summary,  the  Agent  Academy  platform  creates,  trains  and  re-trains  its  society  of 
agents  in  order  to  manage  any  given  scenario.  Such  a  scenario,  which  is  the  motivating 
application  for  the  development,  is  the  O3RTAA  system,  which  uses  agents  for  the 
collection and redistribution of environmental data. 

4. The O3RTAA Scenario 

The  O3RTAA  system  aims  to  provide  environmental  alerts  to  both  individuals  (asthma 
patients,  allergic  people  etc.)  and  public  authorities  (hospitals,  civil  protection  etc.) 
depending  on  the  levels  of  certain  atmospheric  variables,  which  are  collected  by  the 
Mediterranean  Centre  for  Environmental  Studies  (CEAM).  The  system  is  supposed  to 
monitor  the  incoming  data  from  the  environmental  sensors  and  make  predictions  as  to  the 
effects  a  certain  change  may  cause  in  the  environment.  Some  changes  will  lead  to  certain 
kind  of  alerts,  which  then  need  to  be  communicated  effectively  to  parties  interested  in  a 
particular alert. 

The  general  structure  of  the  O3RTAA  system  is  given  in  Figure  2.  The  agents  in  this 
scenario  are  responsible  for  diagnosis,  prediction  and  distribution.  Each  of  these  agent 
subsystems work as follows: 

Diagnosis  Component:  This  component  will  be  in  charge  of  analyzing  the  raw  data 
coming  in  from  the  sensor  data  loggers.  The  main  responsibility  of  the  diagnosis  agents  is 
to  screen  this  raw  data  and  to  forward  only  the  significant  changes  while  discarding  faulty 
and  redundant  information.  The  human  users  may  well  input  to  the  system  through  this 
component.  And  also,  all  the  sensed  information  should  be  logged  for  future  learning 
capability. 

Prediction  Component:  When  the  diagnosis  component  decides  that  some  change  or 
fluctuation  in  the  monitored  parameters  is  significant,  this  change  is  forwarded  to  the 
prediction  component.  The  predictor  uses  rule-bases  and  knowledge  acquired  from  the 
historical  data  up  to  that  point  and  also  the  current  sensor  information  retrieved  from  the 
Diagnosis  Component  to  determine  what  kind  of  hazard  (i.e.  alert)  the  change  may  be  an 
indication of. 

Distribution  Component:  When  an  alarm  is  raised  by  the  prediction  component,  this 
event  is  sent  to  the  distribution  component  which  decides  who  will  be  affected  by  the  alarm 
raised  based  on  the  profiles  of  the  users  and  their  current  locations.  Once  a  list  of  users  to 
be  informed  is  generated  the  alarm  is  sent  to  each  user  over  the  communication  channel 
preferred  by  the  user  (e-mail,  html,  voice,  SMS  etc.).  An  important  thing  to  consider  here  is 
that  the  following:  According  to  the  profile  information  and  the  urgency  of  the  alarm,  the 
distribution  component  decides  on  sending  or  delaying  an  alarm.  As  an  example,  a  human 
authority  may  indicate  in  his  profile  that  he  wishes  to  receive  the  alarm  through  email  and 
during  office  hours.  However  if  an  alarm  is  important,  this  component  can  decide  to  send 
an  alarm  at  4  A.M  by  a  SMS  (Short  Message  Service)  to  his  phone  number,  and  the  email 

 
 
 
later.  Obviously 

this  agent  will  be  working 
message 
inefficiently,  but  the  importance  of  the  alarm  is  decided  by  the  Diagnosis  component  and 
the  failure  in  this  case  is  of  the  Diagnosis  Component  so  the  diagnosis  component  have 
have to be retrained through user feed back. 

this  decision 

incorrect, 

is 

if 

POLUTION DYNAMICS                                                 

      (NO2NO3, O3, Pressure) 
      from Environmental Sensors  

  OZONE ALARMS 
                                         to Civil Protection Agencies,  

                                                            Medical Services, Asthma Patients 

Contribution Agents and 
Data Management Agents 
are renamed to Diagnosis 
and  Predictor  Agents 
respectively. 

Automatic Network for Ambient Surveillance and Control,  
once an hour checkings are provided from 25 Stations in Valencia region 

Figure 2 Overall View of the O3RTAA Scenario 

5. Realization of the O3RTAA scenario through the Agent Academy framework 

How  the  Agent  Academy  framework  handles  the  O3RTAA  scenario  can  be  explained 
through  the  processing  steps  when  a  new  change  in  the  environment  occurs  as  shown  in 
Figure 3. 

Sensors  collecting  information  on  the  environmental  changes  alert  the  Diagnosis  Agent 
(1)  when  a  change  occurs  in  the  parameters  of  the  environment  (i.e.  O3,  NO2,  pressure, 
etc).  The  Diagnosis  Agent,  after  validating  the  signal  and  deciding  that  it  is  significant, 
records the location information of the sensor and informs the Predictor Agent (2). 

The  Predictor  Agent  in  the  system,  after  obtaining  the  necessary  information  from  the 
Diagnosis  Agent,  decides  whether  an  alarm  is  to  be  raised  and  if  so,  what  type  of  alarm  is 
necessary  and  gives  this  to  the  Distributor  agent  (13)  together  with  the  location  information 
to be distributed to the users. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Information Flow through the Agent Academy - O3RTAA Prototype 

When  a  Predictor  Agent  decides  it  needs  to  update  its  prediction  strategy,  it  requests  a 
new  decision  structure  from  the  Agent  Training  Module  as  a  set  of  Java  Expert  System 
Shell  (JESS)  rules  (3).  Agent  Training  Module  requests  a  prediction  strategy  from  the  Data 
Miner.  Data  Miner  requests  previously  inserted  training  examples  related  with  a  certain 
location  from  the  Agent  Use  Repository  (4).  This  information,  that  is,  the  previously 
inserted  training  examples  related  with  a  certain  location  is  transferred  from  the  Agent  Use 
Repository to the Data Miner (5,6). 

Using  data-mining  algorithms,  the  Data  Miner  constructs  a  data  structure  and  sends  it  to 
the  Agent  Training  Module  (7).  The  content  language  and  the  ontology  are  predetermined 
and  known  by  both  of  the  agents.  Since  the  Data  Miner  returns  the  new  decision  strategy  in 
a  standard  language,  and  the  Predictor  Agent  uses  a  JESS  rule  set,  it  is  necessary  to  convert 
one  into  the  other.  Therefore,  the  decision  strategy  obtained  from  the  Data  Miner  is  sent  to 
the  JESS  Rule  converter  (8,9).  The  Agent  Training  Module  forwards  these  rules  to  the 
Predictor Agent, which had requested them in step 3 (10). 

The  Predictor  Agent  sends  these  Java  Expert  System  Shell  (JESS)  Rules  and  the  current 

 
 
values  of  environment  parameters  (obtained  at  step  2  from  the  Diagnosis  agent  and 
represented  as  Assert  statements  of  JESS)  to  its  JESS  Engine  for  execution  (Steps  11,12).  If 
upon  execution  the  expert  system  decides  that  there  is  a  need  to  raise  an  alarm,  the 
Predictor  agent  sends  this  alarm,  along  with  type  and  location  information  to  the  Distributor 
Agent  (13).  It  should  be  noted  that  the  location  of  the  change  and  alarm  is  obtained  at  step  2 
from the Diagnosis Agent. 

the  Ericsson  Mobile  Positioning  System  Software  Development  Kit,  finds 

The  User  Agents  hold  user  profile  information  for  different  subscribers.  These  profiles 
include  the  types  of  alarms  the  user  requires,  the  location  of  the  user  and  the  delivery 
information  and  format  such  as  HTML,  CHTML,  WML,  or  xHTML.  If  the  user  is  mobile, 
his  location  information  is  obtained  from  his  user  Agent  (steps  14,15).  The  User  agent  then, 
using 
the 
location  of  the  user  as  latitude  and  longitude.  The  data  in  this  specific  format  is  converted 
into  a  format  compatible  with  the  location  information  received  from  the  Diagnosis  agent 
provided  at  step  1.  Based  on  the  location  of  the  user  and  the  specified  alarm  type  in  the  user 
profile,  the  users  are  alerted  (step  16).  The  users  provide  feedback  on  the  usefulness  of  the 
alarm,  which  are  collected  by  the  Feedback  Agent  to  be  fed  into  Agent  Use  Repository 
(steps  17,  18,  19).  The  feedback  obtained  from  individual  users  affect  the  data  in  the  Agent 
Use  Repository  only  when  it  exceeds  a  certain  threshold.  The  feedback  coming  from  the 
public institutions, on the other hand, directly influences the Agent Use Repository. 

6. Summary 

In  this  paper  we  described  the  Agent  Academy  attempt  to  develop  a  framework  through 
which  users  can  create  an  agent  community  having  the  ability  to  train  and  retrain  its  own 
agents  using  Data  Mining  techniques.  After  presenting  AA  core  components,  we  discussed 
the  ontology  concept  and  the  way  it  affects  the  training  procedure.  We  described  the 
O3RTAA  scenario,  which  fires  environmental  alarms  and  we  realized  it  through  the  AA 
perspective.  

We  have  used  a  multi-agent  system  in  realizing  the  O3RTAA  scenario  because  the 
components  of  the  system  are  highly  distributed,  autonomous  and  communicate  with  each 
other  through  messages.  Furthermore  the  O3RTAA  system  components  involve  decision 
making. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  the  European  Commission  IST  Programme, 
under  the  contract  IST-2000-31050.  Authors  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Miguel  Alborg  and 
his  associates  in  IDI-EIKON,  Valencia,  Spain,  for  their  assistance  on the O3RTAA scenario 
and  the  Mediterranean  Center  for  Environmental  Studies  Foundation  (CEAM),  Valencia, 
Spain, for the provision of the environmental data. 

References 

[1] Java Agent Development Environment, http://jade.cselt.it/, WWW Site 
[2] Java Expert System Shell, http://herzberg.ca.sandia.gov/jess/, WWW Site 
[3] Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents, FIPA Content Language Library Specifications, Specification, 
8 2001 
[4] Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents, FIPA Ontology Service Specifications, Specification, 8 2001  
[5]  Foundation  for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents,  FIPA  Semantic  Language  (SL)  Content  Language 
Specifications, Specification, 8 2001 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
