A Message Passing Strategy for Decentralized
Connectivity Maintenance in Agent Removal

Derya Aksaray, A. Yasin Yazıcıo˘glu, Eric Feron, and Dimitri N. Mavris

1

3
1
0
2

v
o
N
1

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
4
2
0
.
1
1
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In a multi-agent system, agents coordinate to achieve
global tasks through local communications. Coordination usually
requires sufﬁcient information ﬂow, which is usually depicted by
the connectivity of the communication network. In a networked
system, removal of some agents may cause a disconnection. In
order to maintain connectivity in agent removal, one can design
a robust network topology that tolerates a ﬁnite number of
agent losses, and/or develop a control strategy that recovers
connectivity. This paper proposes a decentralized control scheme
based on a sequence of replacements, each of which occurs
between an agent and one of its immediate neighbors. The
replacements always end with an agent, whose relocation does not
cause a disconnection. We show that such an agent can be reached
by a local rule utilizing only some local information available in
agents’ immediate neighborhoods. As such, the proposed message
passing strategy guarantees the connectivity maintenance in
arbitrary agent removal. Furthermore, we signiﬁcantly improve
the optimality of the proposed scheme by incorporating d -
criticality (i.e. the criticality of an agent in its d -neighborhood).

I. INTRODUCTION

OVER the last decade, advances in networking and com-
puting technologies along with new manufacturing techniques
have created a new paradigm shift towards multi-agent systems
(MAS) in engineering applications. A MAS involves a set of
agents. In most cases, some information ﬂow among the agents
via local communications. Recently, there is a signiﬁcant in-
terest in using multiple unmanned vehicles over large areas for
target tracking (e.g. [1], [2]), environmental monitoring (e.g.
[3], [4]), persistent surveillance (e.g. [5], [6]), formation and
coverage (e.g. [7], [8]), and several others. In these missions, it
is often desirable to have a connected communication network.
However, an agent removal may cause a disconnection.

Multi-agent health management problems emphasize that
there is an inherent possibility of agent removal in a MAS
due to failure or refueling (e.g. [9]–[11]). In such cases,
connectivity maintenance can be achieved through proactive
(e.g. [12]–[14]) or reactive (e.g. [15], [16]) approaches. In
proactive approaches, a robust network topology is designed a
priori to mission such that the network can tolerate a ﬁnite
number of agent losses. In reactive approaches, a control
strategy is developed such that the network self-repairs itself in
the case of agent removal. Note that relying only on proactive

D. Aksaray, E. Feron, and D.N. Mavris are with the Department of
Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332
USA (e-mails: daksaray@gatech.edu, eric.feron@aerospace.gatech.edu, dim-
itri.mavris@aerospace@gatech.edu).

A.Y. Yazıcıo˘glu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA (e-mail:
yasin@gatech.edu).

approaches, by adding redundant edges to the graph for strong
connectivity, can be impractical in missions that have limited
resources for communication and a possibility of losing large
number of agents.

Recently, there is a growing interest in the recovery pro-
cesses for connectivity maintenance of networked systems.
These processes can be characterized as centralized or de-
centralized with respect to the available information of the
overall or local network structure, respectively. In a large scale
system, the availability of the overall network is not a realistic
assumption. Therefore, a decentralized strategy is preferable
over a centralized one due to practicality and scalability
concerns.

This paper introduces a decentralized recovery scheme
that is applicable to any scale of networked systems. The
decentralized scheme is based on a sequence of replacements
occurring between an agent and one of its neighbors. Each
agent is assumed to have a unique ID, which is known to
its immediate neighbors. Before an agent leaves the group
(e.g. due to reaching to a critical power threshold), it creates
a message with its individual ID and passes it to one of
its neighbors as a request for that neighbor to replace itself.
Whenever an agent receives a message, it adds its own ID
to the bottom of the message and sends it
to one of its
other neighbors, whose ID is not included in the message,
i.e. a neighbor who has not received the message earlier.
Accordingly, some consecutive replacements are executed. A
message passing strategy is similar to token-based techniques
used in various algorithms, such as in [17] and [18], to record
the nodes visited by the token. In this paper, we use such a
token-based idea, and we show that the resulting replacement
sequences guarantee connectivity in any agent removal. The
proposed strategy is a decentralized scheme that leverages
only local information (e.g. agent IDs) for the connectivity
maintenance, hence it is applicable to networks of any scale.
The organization of this paper is as follows: Section II
presents some related work in the literature. Section III depicts
some mathematical preliminaries. Section IV motivates and
deﬁnes the problem. Sections V and VI elaborate on the re-
placement control problem and introduce the message passing
strategies. Section VII presents the Monte Carlo simulations
for the analysis of proposed control scheme and its comparison
to an optimal (minimum number of replacements) centralized
method. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK

Recently, a great amount of interest has been devoted to
the analysis of multi-agent systems via the graph theory. In

 
 
 
 
 
 
these studies, the nodes of a graph represent the agents (such
as robots, sensors or individuals), and edges represent the
direct interactions between them. For such a representation,
a fundamental graph property related to the system robustness
is graph connectivity (e.g. [19]–[21] and the literature cited
within). As such, the robustness of a system is related to
the total number of edges/nodes, whose removal will cause a
network disconnection. For the graph theoretical connectivity
control of mobile systems against edge failure, the literature is
including, but not limited to, optimization based connectivity
control (e.g. [21]), continuous feedback connectivity control
(e.g. [22]), and control based on the estimation of the algebraic
connectivity (e.g. [23]). In these studies, the authors mainly
consider uncertainty in edges and assume a constant number
of nodes.

Maintaining connectivity against the removal of multiple
agents is a more challenging problem than maintaining con-
nectivity against multiple edge removal [12]. In the last few
years, there has been a signiﬁcant interest in addressing agent
loss problem in networked systems. In [12] and [13], the
main focus is on the design of robust network topologies
that can tolerate a ﬁnite number of agent removals. In [13]
and [24], the authors propose self-repair strategies that create
new connections among the neighbors of the failing agent.
In addition, a connectivity maintenance strategy based on
decentralized estimation of algebraic connectivity is presented
in [25]. Based on their estimations, agents increase or decrease
their broadcast radii for satisfying connectivity requirements.

Different from the previous studies, [15], [26], [27] and [16]
consider mobile agents and propose some agent movements
for connectivity restoration of wireless sensor networks in
agent failure. In [15], a distributed control algorithm is in-
troduced for connectivity maintenance. Before any failure, the
algorithm runs and identiﬁes all critical agents, whose failure
will cause network disconnection. Then, it assigns required
actions to each agent in advance. The studies in [26] and [27]
differ from [15] by maintaining connectivity through some
agent relocations initiated by the failing agent. In [27], the
authors present a centralized algorithm as an alternative to
the decentralized scheme given in [26], which is not always
feasible in general graphs. Finally, the authors of [16] use the
shortest path routing table in their algorithm, and they propose
a distributed recovery mechanism that maintains the network
connectivity with minimal topology change, i.e. not increasing
the length of the shortest path between any arbitrary two agents
after the reconﬁguration.

In this paper, we present a decentralized recovery mech-
anism to maintain network connectivity in arbitrary agent
removal. The replacement control problem has been initially
introduced in [28], and replacements by minimum degree
neighbors have been presented as a solution. Here, we gen-
eralize the connectivity maintenance scheme as the message
passing strategy, and we show that this method maintains
connectivity even in the case of agents sharing minimum
amount of information, i.e. only node IDs. Moreover, we show
that utilizing d -criticality information in the message passing
strategy signiﬁcantly improves the optimality of the solution.

2

III. MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES
An undirected graph, G = (V, E), consists of a set of nodes,
V , and a set of undirected edges, E. A k-length path, p, is a
sequence of nodes (p0, p1, ..., pk) such that any {pi, pi+1} ∈ E.
Here, pi is the ith element of p, which corresponds to a node v j.
A path in G is called simple if it does not have any repeated
nodes. The distance between any two nodes is equal to the
length of the shortest path between them. The diameter of G ,
, is deﬁned as the largest distance between any two nodes of
G . An undirected graph, G , is connected if there exists a path
between any two nodes of the graph.

In a graph, the unweighted adjacency matrix, A ∈ Rn×n, is

Aij =

1
0

(cid:26)

if (vi, v j) ∈ E,
otherwise.

(1)

The neighbor set, Nvi, of vi is the set including all adjacent

nodes that are connected to vi.

Nvi = {v j | (vi, v j) ∈ E}.

(2)

The degree of vi is the number of nodes adjacent to vi, in

other words the cardinality of Nvi .

IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION

Given a networked system with no control strategy for the
connectivity maintenance, the overall network will eventually
become disconnected as more agents are removed. In fact, it
is possible to observe graph disconnection after the removal
of a small set of randomly selected agents. We demonstrate
this claim by conducting Monte Carlo simulations with Erd˝os-
R´enyi graphs [31]. Let a connected graph, G , have 50 nodes
that have a probability of 0.04 to connect with other nodes.
Suppose that a randomly selected node and its incident edges
are iteratively removed until the occurrence of the ﬁrst graph
disconnection. When the graph is disconnected for the ﬁrst
time, we record the corresponding iteration number (idis). Then
we repeat this process for 1000 cases that are initiated with
different random graphs. The results of the simulations are
displayed as an empirical cumulative distribution function of
idis illustrated in Figure 1. To provide insight into the randomly
generated graphs, Figure 1 also displays the average degree
distribution. As it is seen from the ﬁgure, the removal of 10
nodes most likely cause disconnection in random graphs with
50 nodes and an approximate average degree of 2.5.

As the degrees of nodes increase in a graph, the robustness
to agent failure increases. However, there is a compromise
between improving the robustness and increasing the total edge
number. While a robust graph is tolerant to a ﬁnite number of
agent removals, it involves many redundant edges that increase
the overall communication cost of the network. Alternative to
designing a network with a large number of redundant links,
a control strategy can be utilized to maintain connectivity.
Such a control strategy may provide self-reconﬁguration on the
graph whenever an agent removal occurs. For static networked
systems, the removal of an agent will trigger to have new
connections in the neighborhood of the removed agent. For

D
3

the edges of G correspond the required interactions if a pair
of agents are assigned on the corresponding nodes (tasks).
the communication network of agents is
In this setting,
the sub-graph of G based on the agent assignments. Here,
our main objective is to maintain the connectivity of the
communication network in the arbitrary agent removal by
properly assigning agents to the feasible points. One way to
maintain the network connectivity in these problems is to
replace the removed agent by one of the remaining agents.
For instance, if the removal of an agent causes disconnection
in the network, then one of its neighbors may replace it
to recover the connectivity. If the replacement also causes
a disconnection, then another replacement is also required.
In this manner, the replacements can be executed until a
connected network is obtained. Accordingly, we introduce the
replacement control problem as follows:

Replacement Control (RC) problem: Given a set of agents
with a connected communication network, design a decen-
tralized control scheme such that the agents realize minimum
number of node replacements to maintain connectivity in the
presence of agent removal.

V. MESSAGE PASSING STRATEGY

For any solution of the RC problem,

the sequence of
replacements needs to end with a noncritical node since the
removal of such nodes does not require any replacements.
Deﬁnition 1. (Node Criticality) A node, vi, is critical in G if
the graph, G ∗ = G − (vi, Ei), obtained by removing vi and Ei
is disconnected; otherwise, vi is noncritical.

Note that a connected graph always has a ﬁnite number of

noncritical nodes [38].
Proposition 1. (Existence of noncritical nodes): [38] Let G be
a connected undirected graph. Suppose that each of its nodes
has a degree at least k. Then G has at least k + 1 noncritical
nodes.

For any connected graph, there are always at least two
noncritical nodes, and the goal of the RC problem is to ﬁnd
one. The following remark presents a condition for a trivial
noncritical node in a graph.
Remark 1. Given a connected graph G = (V, E), let vi ∈ V be
a leaf node such that |Nvi| = 1. Then, vi is noncritical in G
because any simple path involving vi either starts or ends with
vi. Hence, its removal will not cause a disconnection between
any two nodes.

In the RC problem, a replacement is assumed to occur
in between a node and one of its neighbors. Therefore, the
sequence of replacements can also be deﬁned as a path from
the removed node to a noncritical node.
Remark 2. Let G be a connected undirected graph. It follows
from Proposition 1 that there always exists a path from any
node in G to a noncritical node.

Note that a centralized controller can solve the RC problem
by ﬁnding a shortest path between the removed node and a

Fig. 1.
(a) The empirical CDF for the iteration number when a graph
disconnection is observed for the ﬁrst time. (b) The average degree distribution
for the generated Erd˝os-R´enyi graphs in the Monte Carlo simulations.

mobile networked systems, the removal of an agent will induce
some agent movements until the connectivity is maintained.

In many distributed systems, network connectivity plays an
important role in achieving a desired system performance.
For instance, connectivity is required for the propagation of
local data to achieve coordinated tasks. As such, formation
of connected networks are emphasized in spacecraft studies
(e.g. [32], [33]), where multiple spacecrafts synchronize their
attitudes with each other via local interactions. Alternatively,
a peer-to-peer network (e.g. Gnutella) is a distributed system,
where individual computers communicate directly with each
other and share information and resources without using
centralized servers. In these systems, network protocols are
designed to achieve various objectives, one of which is the
ability to operate in a dynamic environment (e.g. [34], [35]). In
this manner, when a host computer leaves a network, utilizing
a connectivity maintenance strategy avoids network partition-
ings and prevents the performance degradation. Moreover,
a group of sensors can be deployed in an area of interest
to achieve distributed estimation in a harsh environment. In
these systems, the network topology is dynamic due to the
possibility of sensor failures or efﬁcient energy management.
As such, the sensors may increase or decrease their sensing
radii to achieve desired connectivity requirements [25]. Fi-
nally, connectivity is crucial in surveillance missions, where
a group of heterogeneous agents or unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV) operate around a base. For example, an efﬁcient task
assignment, which also satisﬁes a connected communication
network, provides agents to stream back the surveillance data
back to the base [36]. Similarly, a group of UAVs can monitor
a desired region to track radar data and a base process the
individually gathered data to estimate the position of a target
[37]. In such problems, a UAV can go further away from
the group to investigate unmonitored areas, or an agent can
return to the base. The removal of an agent/UAV may cause a
disconnection in the communication network, which leads to a
base not to collect data from the disconnected agent(s)/UAV(s).
In this study, we consider an undirected connected graph,
G , where the nodes of G represent the feasible points that
agents can be assigned to. Here, a feasible point can be
(tasks among peers in a computer network) or
abstract
physical (areas of interest in robotic networks). Furthermore,

noncritical node. Here, the optimal solution is obtained by
assuming the availability of the overall graph structure. The
goal driving this work is to ﬁnd a decentralized scheme that
can perform close to optimal.

Deﬁnition 2. (Maximal simple path) Let G = (V, E) be a
connected undirected graph, and let Nvi denote the neighbors
of vi ∈ V . Suppose that p = (p0, p1, ..., pk) is a simple path
with a length of k. Then p is a maximal simple path if
Npk ⊆ {p0, p1, ..., pk}.

[28] Given a connected undirected graph G ,
Theorem 1.
a maximal simple path on G always ends with a noncritical
node.

Corollary 1. A sequence of replacements along a maximal
simple path, (p0, p1, ..., pk), on G , such that p0 represents any
arbitrary removed node and any pi+1 ∈ Npi \ {p0, p1, ..., pi},
maintains the graph connectivity.

Proof. The maximal simple path (p0, p1, ..., pk) is the replace-
ment path where p0 is any arbitrary removed node and for
0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1 any pi is replaced by pi+1. After the replacements
are realized, the graph will have a new structure as if pk is
removed from the system. From Theorem 1, we know that pk
is noncritical so its removal does not cause any disconnection
in G .

In light of the preceding facts, we introduce a decentral-
ized connectivity maintenance scheme called message passing
strategy (MPS). Let p0 be any arbitrary node that will be
removed from G . The objective of MPS is to ﬁnd a sequence
of replacements, which is initiated by p0 and ending with a
noncritical node, by using only some local information. In this
manner, the replacements will result in a graph reconﬁguration
as if the ﬁnal node in the replacement sequence, which is
noncritical, is removed from G instead of p0.

The outline of MPS is as follows: Before the removal
of p0, ﬁrst p0 creates a message including its own node
ID as {p0} and checks whether it is a leaf node. If it is
a leaf node, then it is noncritical (from Remark 1) and its
removal will not cause a disconnection. Otherwise, it selects
a node, p1, from Np0 \ {p0}. Then, p0 sends the message to
p1, which will replace p0. In this respect, whenever a node,
pi, receives a message, {p0, ..., pi−1}, from pi−1, before pi
replaces pi−1, it adds its individual node ID to the bottom of
the message as {p0, ..., pi−1, pi}, and it sends the message to
one of its neighbors from the set Npi \ {p0, ..., pi}. Eventually,
the message passing process, whose pseudo-code is displayed
in Algorithm 1, stops when Npi \ {p0, ..., pi} = /0 or p0 is a
leaf node.

4

no replacements required;

Npi ← Np0; message ← (p0);

Algorithm 1: Message Passing Strategy (MPS)
Input : An arbitrary node, p0, from G
Out put : Connectivity maintenance in the removal of p0
Assumption : Each node shares its unique node ID with its neighbors.
1 : initialization: pi ← p0;
2 : if |Np0| = 1
3 :
4 : else
5 :
7 :
8 :
9 :
10 :
6 :
11 :
12 : end if

s.t.
pi+1 ← v
pi sends message to pi+1;
pi replaces the second last node in the message;
pi ← pi+1; Npi ← Npi+1;
message ← (message, pi) ;

while Npi \ message 6= /0

v ∈ Npi \ message;

end while

Proposition 2. The message obtained from MPS results in a
set of ordered nodes, which represents either a leaf node or a
maximal simple path.

Proof. The message obtained from MPS is either {p0} or
{p0, ..., pi, ..., pk}. If it is {p0}, then |Np0| = 1 implying that
p0 is a leaf node. If the message is {p0, ..., pi, ..., pk},
it
involves consecutive pairs of nodes, (pi, pi+1) ∈ E, thus the
message always represents a path in G . Additionally, the
message never involves repeated nodes because each pi selects
pi+1 from Npi \ {p0, ..., pi}. Thus, the path is always simple.
Finally, MPS stops whenever Npk \ {p0, ..., pi, ..., pk} = /0.
From Deﬁnition 2, the ordered nodes in the message is a
maximal simple path.

Corollary 2. MPS always stops at a noncritical node. Hence,
MPS guarantees connectivity maintenance in the removal of
any arbitrary node from G = (V, E).

Proof. Let p0 ∈ V be any arbitrary node that will be removed
from G . If p0 is a leaf node, MPS stops at p0, and the
connectivity maintenance is an immediate result. Otherwise,
p0 generates a message as {p0}, and the message is mod-
iﬁed as {p0, ..., pi} whenever it is received by pi ∈ V . Let
N + 1 be the total number of nodes in G . In this respect,
as i → N, {p0, ..., pi} → {p0, ..., pN} = V . Eventually, there
exist an instant k = i ≤ N, at which Npk ⊆ {p0, ..., pk}.
From Theorem 1, pk is a noncritical node because it satisﬁes
Npk \ {p0, ..., pk} = /0. Consequently, MPS always stops at a
noncritical node. Moreover, from Corollary 1 the replacements
based on MPS always guarantee connectivity maintenance
because the graph is reconﬁgured as if pk is removed from
G instead of p0.

An illustration for MPS is displayed in Figure 2, where
there is an initially connected graph with 7 nodes. As it
is seen from Figure 2(b), the removal of v0 will create a
disconnection in the graph. If each node runs MPS,
then
a replacement path is generated as {v0, v2, v4} such that v2
replaces v0, and v4 replaces v2. Note that {v0, v2, v4} is not
the only replacement path, i.e. {v0, v1, v5}. Consequently, the
system reconﬁgures itself to maintain connectivity, and, in
the resulting conﬁguration, it is guaranteed to observe the
removal of a noncritical node (e.g. v4) instead of the removal
an arbitrarily removed node (e.g. v0).

v4

v3

v2

v0

v1

(a)

v6

v4

v2

v6

v4

v6

v5

v3

v1

v5

v3

(b)

v2

v1

(c)

v5

v3

v6

v5

v4

v2

v1

(d)

Fig. 2. An illustration for MPS. (a) Initially connected graph. (b) v0 will
leave the system. Since it is not a leaf node, it creates a message as {v0} and
selects a neighbor from Nv0 \ {v0} = {v1,v2} to replace itself. (c) v2 receives
the message and modiﬁes it as {v0,v2}. Then, it selects a neighbor from Nv2 \
{v0,v2} = {v4,v6} to replace itself. (d) v4 receives the message and modiﬁes
it as {v0,v2,v4}. It attempts to select a neighbor from Nv4 \ {v0,v2,v4} = /0
for its replacement. Since Nv4 \ {v0,v2,v4} = /0, v4 cannot send the message
to any node and the algorithm stops.

A. Performance of MPS

Given a networked system, reactive schemes for connectiv-
ity maintenance result in some changes in the graph topology.
While maintaining the graph connectivity, an important aspect
is not to cause signiﬁcant changes in the graph properties such
as the total number of edges or the maximum node degree.
Note that the total number of edges and the maximum node
degree can be directly related to the overall communication
cost, whose increase is not desirable for a networked system
containing agents with limited power capacity.

Proposition 3. A sequence of replacements along a maximal
simple path, (p0, p1, ..., pk), on G , such that every pi+1 ∈ Npi \
{p0, p1, ..., pi}, guarantees no increase in the total number
of edges and maximum node degree in the presence of any
arbitrary node removal.
Proof. Let p = (p0, p1, ..., pk) be the replacement path, G ∗
be the new graph structure after the replacements. Then, this
corollary is proven in two parts: (1) In the removal of an
arbitrary node, p0, p results in G ∗, which corresponds to the
removal of pk and its adjacent edges from G . As a result, the
total number of edges decrease as the agents are removed. (2)
Let p0 in p be the agent that has the maximum degree dmax
in G . If p0 is removed, then p1 replaces p0. Now, if k = 1,
then p1 is the noncritical node that will not be replaced. As
a consequence, the degree of p1 becomes dmax − 1 after the
replacement. If k 6= 1, then p1 will be replaced by p2. Hence,
the degree of p1 becomes dmax after the replacements. In both
cases, p1 becomes the node with the maximum degree in G ∗
after replacing p0. Finally, in the removal of an arbitrary node,
which does not correspond to the maximum degree node ˜v,
either no replacements occur in the neighborhood of ˜v, or the
replacements in the neighborhood of ˜v may cause at most one
reduction in dmax. As a result, the maximum node degree in
G ∗ becomes either dmax or dmax − 1.

The optimal solution satisfying the minimum number of
replacements for the RC problem can be obtained by a
centralized controller by ﬁnding the shortest path between the
removed node and a noncritical node on the graph. Note that
such a centralized controller requires the complete information
about the graph. The objective of MPS is to solve the RC

5

problem only by using some local and partial information.
Due to utilizing limited information, MPS may not necessarily
guarantee the optimal solution for any graphs. In this section,
we will discuss the performance of MPS for various graph
structures.

Proposition 4. In any undirected connected graph, G =
(V, E), the maximum number of replacements that can occur
via MPS is (|V | − 1).

Proof. From Proposition 2, MPS results in a message that
is the sequence of replacements represented as a maximal
simple path, p. Let |p| ≥ |V | + 1, then at least one node
appears multiple times in p, thus p is not simple. This is
a contradiction, hence |p| ≤ |V | implying an upper bound for
the number of replacements as |V | − 1.

Deﬁnition 3. A tree graph is an undirected graph in which
any two nodes are connected by exactly one simple path.

Proposition 5. In tree graphs, G = (V, E),
the maximum
number of replacements that can happen via MPS is (D − 1),
where D

is the diameter of G .

Proof. Note that a noncritical node in a tree graph is always a
leaf node, and a critical node always has a degree of 2. In this
manner, the diameter of a tree graph corresponds to the length
of the longest maximal simple path. Let {p0, p1, ...., pD −1, pD }
denote to the longest maximal simple path. In this path, both
p0 and pD
are leaf nodes (noncritical), and the nodes in
between are critical. If p0 is the removed node, then MPS
does not initiate replacements. If p1 is the removed node,
then the maximum number of replacements based on MPS
may occur along the sequence {p1, ...., pD −1, pD } resulting in
(D − 1) replacements.

Deﬁnition 4. A biconnected graph is a connected graph that
does not have any critical nodes.

Proposition 6. In biconnected graphs, MPS cannot achieve
optimal solution for connectivity maintenance.

Proof. In a biconnected graph, G = (V, E), each node is
noncritical. However, based on MPS, any arbitrary node, v ∈ V ,
that will be removed from G always initiates the replacements.
In this manner, the graph is reconﬁgured with |V | − 1 node
replacements even though the removal of v does not cause
any disconnection in G .

Note that MPS may not always result in the minimum
number of replacements in agent removal. For instance, if
the removed agent is not a leaf node, but noncritical, MPS
still
initiates the sequence of replacements as depicted in
Proposition 6. From a centralized perspective, understanding
the criticality of a node is feasible. However, the node criti-
cality may not be determined locally. As shown in Figure 3,
let G1 and G2 be an inﬁnite cycle and inﬁnite path graphs,
respectively. Suppose that any node in G knows its d -hop
neighborhood. Let v0 be the removed node. As seen from
Figure 3, v0 is noncritical in G1, but critical in G2. Note that
for any ﬁnite d , v0 has the same neighborhood in G1 and G2,

hence it can not differentiate its criticality by just looking at
its d -neighborhood.

v1

v0

v2

v1

v0

v2

(a) Inﬁnite cycle graph (G1)

(b) Inﬁnite path graph (G2)

Fig. 3. Examples to graphs with inﬁnite nodes.

Since the criticality cannot be always determined locally,
MPS may sometimes initiate a sequence of replacements when
a noncritical node is removed. Such an optimality gap is due
to the limitation of local information in the computations.
However, it is important to emphasize that, for any undirected
connected graph, connectivity maintenance in the presence
of any node removal is guaranteed by MPS by using only
some local information. As depicted, MPS always stops at
a noncritical node. Thus, the graph reconﬁgures itself as if
a noncritical node is removed from the system instead of
an arbitrary node, p0. In this respect, pi selects the node,
pi+1, which will replace itself, from Npi \ {p0, ...., pi}. Here,
a question arises as which node from Npi \ {p0, ...., pi} should
be selected to increase the efﬁciency of MPS. For instance, a
random selection scheme requires very little information to
be shared among nodes, or a node selection based on the
minimum degree, [28], may capture the leaf node neighbors.
Consequently, as the information possessed by a node and
shared in the neighborhood increases, the solution approaches
the optimal solution.

VI.

d -CRITICALITY MPS

In this section, we introduce a variant of MPS, which uses
d -hop criticality information for each node. Here, the d -hop
criticality is deﬁned as Deﬁnition 5.

Deﬁnition 5. (d -hop criticality) A node, vi, is d -hop critical
the subgraph, induced by the d -neighborhood of vi,
is
if
is d -hop
disconnected by the removal of vi; otherwise, vi
noncritical.

Remark 3. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph, and let vi ∈ V
be d -hop noncritical. Then, vi is noncritical in G . Suppose
that a simple path, pnm, connects any arbitrary two nodes
vn, vm ∈ V and includes vi as an intermediate node. In pnm,
vi appears between two of its neighbors. In the removal of vi,
there exist another path, pi, consisting of some nodes within
d hops of vi since vi is d -hop noncritical by deﬁnition. Hence,
the removal of vi does not cause a disconnection between vn
and vm because vi can be replaced by pi. Consequently, a
d -hop noncritical node is always a noncritical node in G .

In light of Remark 3, d -hop criticality is used in MPS as in
Algorithm 2. In this respect, each node knows whether itself
and immediate neighbors are d -hop critical.

6

no replacements required;

while Npi \ message 6= /0

Npi ← Np0; message ← (p0);

Agorithm 2: d -criticality MPS
Input : An arbitrary node, p0, from G
Out put : Connectivity maintenance in the removal of p0
Assumption : Each node shares both its unique node ID and d -criticality with its neighbors.
1 : initialization: pi ← p0;
2 : if |Np0| = 1
3 :
4 : else
5 :
7 :
8 :
9 :
10 :
11 :
12 :
13 :
14 :
6 :
15 :
16 : end if

end if
pi sends message to pi+1;
pi replaces the second last node in the message;
pi ← pi+1; Npi ← Npi+1;
message ← (message, pi) ;

any v ∈ Npi \ message is d -noncritical;
pi+1 ← v s.t. v is one of the d -noncritical nodes;

pi+1 ← v s.t. v is randomly selected from Npi \ message;

end while

else

if

In d -criticality MPS, whenever a node, pi, receives a message,
it adds its own individual ID likewise MPS. Then, it selects
a neighbor from the candidate set, Npi \ {p0, ..., pi}, based
on d -criticality. In the case, where the candidate set does not
contain a d -hop noncritical node, pi selects a random node
from the candidate set.

It has been shown in Remark 3 that a d -noncritical node
is globally noncritical in G . Now, a question arises as when
a d -critical node assures global criticality. In this respect,
Proposition 7 presents a sufﬁcient condition that guarantees
global node criticality by relating d
Deﬁnition 6. A chordless cycle in G is a cycle such that no
two nodes of the cycle are connected by an edge that does not
itself belong to the cycle.

to a graph structure.

Proposition 7. Let cmax be the length of the longest chordless
cycle in G . If d ≥ cmax
2 , then a d -critical node is globally
critical in G .
Proof. Let v be a noncritical node in G , and let N d be the
d -neighborhood of v for some d ≥ cmax
2 , where cmax is the
length of the longest chordless cycle in G . Suppose that v is
a d -critical node, then the graph, G ′, induced by the nodes in
N d
is disconnected. Now, since v is noncritical, there exist
a shortest path between the nodes (u, w) ∈ N d , which are
not connected in G ′ but connected in G − v. Moreover, there
always exist a shortest path, (u, p∗, w), where no elements on
p∗ is connected to v (in other words, no elements on p∗ is
in N d ). Note that (u, p∗, w, v, u) is a chordless cycle and its
length, c, cannot be larger than cmax. However, v does not
know the existence of such a path, so c > 2d , which is a
contradiction because 2d ≥ cmax ≥ c.

d ≥ cmax
2 ,

then the replacement sequence
Corollary 3. If
generated via d -MPS involves only one noncritical node,
which is the last node on the replacement sequence.
Proof. Based on Algorithm 2, a message travels from a d -
critical node to a neighboring d -critical node until ﬁnding
a d -noncritical node. In the case of d ≥ cmax
2 , Proposition 7
shows that a d -critical node is globally critical. Hence, the
replacement sequence generated via d -MPS contains only one
noncritical node, which is the last node on the sequence.
Remark 4. Suppose that there is no chordless cycle in G . A
d -critical node for any d ≥ 1 is globally critical in G because

G is a tree graph where each noncritical node is a leaf node.

Remark 5. If d
is selected properly based on the graph
topology (based on Proposition 7 and Remark 4), a d -critical
node is always a critical node. Hence, a resulting replacement
sequence does not contain any redundant replacements since
only the ﬁnal node of the sequence is non-critical.

As it is seen, if d

is selected properly such that a d -
critical node is globally critical, then d -MPS does not cause
any unnecessary agent replacements to maintain connectivity,
and the resulting sequence approaches the optimal solution.
Note that avoiding any unnecessary replacements is crucial
for networked systems with limited power capacity. In some
graph structures, there might not necessarily exist a unique
replacement sequence. As such, if d -noncritical nodes are
beyond the immediate neighborhood of a node v, then v selects
a d -critical neighbor randomly for its replacement. Due to the
randomized nature of selecting replacing agent, d -MPS may
not always guarantee the shortest path to a noncritical node.
In Figure 4, a line graph involving 7 nodes is presented. In
this example, let d = 1, then v1, v0, v3, v4, v5 are 1-critical nodes
whereas v2 and v6 are noncritical nodes. Since the graph does
not contain a chordless circle, from Remark 4, a 1-critical node
is globally critical. Here, we illustrate that d -MPS may result
in a sequence of necessary replacements, but a longer route,
for connectivity maintenance. In this manner, assume that v0 is
removed from the graph. From the perspective of v0, selecting
v1 or v3 is indifferent because v0 can only see N d =1, which
contains the highlighted nodes. Hence, d -MPS results in either
(v0, v1, v2) or (v0, v3, v4, v5, v6) as a replacement sequence.

P r = 0.5

P r = 0.5

v2

v1

v0

v3

v4

v5

v6

In the case of v0 is removed, 1-MPS generates either (v0,v1,v2) or

Fig. 4.
(v0,v3,v4,v5,v6) as a replacement sequence.

Consequently, the optimality of d -MPS depends on the
lengths of the shortest paths from a removed node to one of
the noncritical nodes. If the lengths does not signiﬁcantly vary
from each other, then the solution of d -MPS is close to the
optimal one.

VII. SIMULATION STUDIES

In order to elaborate on the performance of the message
passing strategy, the Monte Carlo simulations are conducted
to understand how close MPS is to the centralized solution. For
the simulations, we use the MATLAB simulation environment
and consider the canonical scenario depicted in the following
section.

A. Canonical Scenario

Consider an indoor reconnaissance and surveillance mis-
sion, where a set of robots (i.e, small unmanned vehicles)
gather data from critical points and share the gathered data

7

to increase their situational awareness. In such a mission, an
undirected connected graph, G , associates with the critical
viewpoints of the environment (i.e. the viewpoints are the
feasible points that a robot can be located on) as in Figure 5,
where the nodes are the viewpoints and the dashed edges
represent the communication links if two robots are located
on the corresponding nodes.

Fig. 5. An indoor environment associated with an undirected connected graph,
whose nodes represent the critical viewpoints and edges represent the possible
communication capability if agents are located on the corresponding nodes.

In this scenario, let each robot have limited energy capacity
and different energy consumption. Then, it is likely to observe
that the robots have variable energy levels. In this respect, a
robot leaves the group when it reaches an energy threshold.
Here, the removal of an agent may cause a disconnection
in the communication network. For example, let 13 agent
be assigned to points such that a connected communication
network is obtained as in (a) of Figure 6. Then the removal of
v4 causes a disconnection in the communication network as in
(b) of Figure 6. Consequently, the objective in this scenario is
to maintain a connected communication network among the
remaining agents with minimum agent replacements.

v5

v4

v2

v3

v1

v12

v6

v7

v8

v10

v9

v13

v11

v1

v12

v5

v2

v3

v6

v7

v8

v10

v11

v9

v13

(a) Connected communication network

(b) Disconnected communication network

Fig. 6.
(a) Thirteen agents assigned to the feasible tasks and having
a connected communication network. (b) The removal of v4 causes four
partitioning in the communication network.

B. Monte Carlo Simulations

Based on the canonical scenario, the objective of the Monte
Carlo simulations is to provide a statistical understanding for
the optimality of MPS and d -criticality MPS with respect
to the centralized solution. In all simulations, we consider
20 assignments, which associate with a randomly generated
undirected connected graph. Initially, we assume 20 agents
individually assigned to each node. At an instant, a randomly

8

Fig. 8. Distributions pertaining to the graph properties and replacement
solutions. As the graph diameter decreases and the average node degree
increases, the replacement sequence driven by MPS diverges from the cen-
tralized solution.

selected arbitrary agent is removed from the network. To
maintain the connectivity, we solve the RC problem via
centralized controller, MPS, and d -criticality MPS.

The results of the Monte Carlo simulations show that
the optimality of MPS signiﬁcantly improves as d -criticality
information is incorporated to the decision scheme for the re-
placements. For example, as illustrated in Table I, an increase
in d
leads to the total number of replacements induced from
d -criticality MPS to approach the number of replacements
resulted from the centralized solution. Note that the huge
cost difference between MPS and d -criticality MPS is due to
the fact that MPS is using a randomized decision mechanism
for the replacements while d -criticality MPS incorporates d -
criticality of a node in the decision mechanism. Furthermore,
the optimality of MPS also varies with respect to the graph
topology. For example, in the case of the graph diameter
decreases and the average node degree increases, the perfor-
mance of MPS degrades while the performance of d -criticality
MPS improves greatly.

TABLE I
BASED ON 500 SIMULATIONS, MEAN COST∗ OF VARIOUS STRATEGIES FOR
CONNECTIVITY MAINTENANCE IN GRAPHS WITH 20 NODES

Mean diameter
9.2
6.7
4.0
∗number of agent replacements

Mean avg. node degree
3.1
4.3
7.3

centralized
0.498
0.186
0.028

MPS
4.960
7.224
12.574

1-criticality MPS
0.626
0.302
0.068

2-criticality MPS
0.556
0.240
0.030

Fig. 9. Distributions pertaining to the graph properties and replacement solu-
tions. As the graph diameter decreases and the average node degree increases,
the performance of d -criticality MPS improves greatly and converges to the
performance of centralized controller.

removed agent. The beneﬁts of the proposed control scheme
are guaranteeing the connectivity maintenance by using only
some local information and not increasing the total number
of edges and the maximum node degree of a network as the
agents are removed.

The optimality gap of the proposed strategy has been
discussed through Monte Carlo simulations by comparing
the performance of the proposed decentralized strategy with
respect to the centralized solution, which results in the min-
imum number of replacements. While the message passing
strategy maintains the graph connectivity even in the case
of replacements by randomly selected agents, it has been
observed that incorporating d -criticality information to the
decision mechanism signiﬁcantly improves the resulting per-
formance. As such, a variant of MPS has been introduced as d -
criticality MPS, which demonstrates a signiﬁcant performance
improvement.

Fig. 7. Distributions pertaining to the graph properties and replacement
solutions. As d - criticality is utilized,
the number of replacements for
preserving connectivity approaches to the number induced by a centralized
controller.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

In this study, the connectivity issue of networked systems
in the presence of agent removal has been discussed, and
a decentralized connectivity maintenance strategy, which is
applicable to any scale of network, has been proposed. We
showed that the message passing strategy (MPS) proposed in
this paper maintains the graph connectivity for any initially
connected network until the removal of all agents. This is
achieved by a sequence of replacements initiated by the

9

[21] M. M. Zavlanos, M. B. Egerstedt, and G. J. Pappas, “Graph-theoretic
connectivity control of mobile robot networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 99, no. 9, pp. 1525–1540, 2011.

[22] L. Sabattini, N. Chopra, and C. Secchi, “On decentralized connectivity
maintenance for mobile robotic systems,” in 50th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control and European Control Conference (CDC-ECC).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 988–993.

[23] L. Sabattini, C. Secchi, and N. Chopra, “Decentralized connectivity
maintenance for networked lagrangian dynamical systems,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2012, pp. 2433–2438.

[24] D. Bauso, L. Giarre, and R. Pesenti, “Quantized dissensus in networks
to death and duplication,” IEEE Transactions on

of agents subject
Automatic Control, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 783–788, 2012.

[25] F. Knorn, R. Stanojevic, M. Corless, and R. Shorten, “A framework for
decentralised feedback connectivity control with application to sensor
networks,” International Journal of Control, vol. 82, no. 11, pp. 2095–
2114, 2009.

[26] A. A. Abbasi, M. Younis, and K. Akkaya, “Movement-assisted con-
nectivity restoration in wireless sensor and actor networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 20, no. 9, pp.
1366–1379, 2009.

[27] S. Wang, X. Mao, S.-J. Tang, X. Li, J. Zhao, and G. Dai, “On
“movement-assisted connectivity restoration in wireless sensor and actor
networks”,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 687–694, 2011.

[28] D. Aksaray and D. Mavris, “Maintaining connectivity for networked
loss,” in AIAA Guidance,

mobile systems in the presence of agent
Navigation, and Control Conference, Boston, MA, 2013.

[29] C. D. Godsil and G. Royle, Algebraic graph theory.

Springer New

York, 2001, vol. 8.

[30] A. Jamakovic and S. Uhlig, “On the relationship between the algebraic
connectivity and graph’s robustness to node and link failures,” in 3rd
EuroNGI Conference on Next Generation Internet Networks.
IEEE,
2007, pp. 96–102.

[31] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, “On the evolution of random graphs,” Magyar

Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutat´o Int. K¨ozl, vol. 5, pp. 17–61, 1960.

[32] R. Dai, J. Maximo, and M. Mesbahi, “Formation of connected networks
for fractionated spacecraft,” in AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference, Minneapolis, MN, 2012.

[33] J. Zhou, Q. Hu, and M. I. Friswell, “Decentralized ﬁnite time attitude
synchronization control of satellite formation ﬂying,” Journal of Guid-
ance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 185–195, 2013.
[34] G. Pandurangan, P. Raghavan, and E. Upfal, “Building low-diameter
peer-to-peer networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 995–1002, 2003.

[35] M. Ripeanu, I. Foster, and A. Iamnitchi, “Mapping the gnutella network:
Properties of large-scale peer-to-peer systems and implications for
system design,” arXiv preprint cs/0209028, 2002.

[36] S. S. Ponda, L. B. Johnson, H.-L. Choi, and J. P. How, “Ensuring net-
work connectivity for decentralized planning in dynamic environments,”
in Proceedings of the AIAA Infotech@ Aerospace Conference, St. Louis,
MO, 2011.

[37] D. W. Casbeer, A. L. Swindlehurst, and R. Beard, “Connectivity in a
UAV multi-static radar network,” in AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and
Control Conference, Keystone, CO, 2006.

[38] S. V. Savchenko, “On the number of noncritical vertices in strongly
connected digraphs,” Mathematical Notes, vol. 79, no. 5, pp. 687–696,
2006.

Some interesting aspects requiring further investigation in-
clude the development of a strategy for simultaneous agent
removals, a throughout study for a more general communi-
cation problem involving the delays and uncertainty, and the
introduction of a more general mission, in which some of the
removed agents return to the mission area.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Mart´ınez and F. Bullo, “Optimal sensor placement and motion
coordination for target tracking,” Automatica, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 661–
668, 2006.

[2] R. Olfati-Saber, “Distributed tracking for mobile sensor networks with
information-driven mobility,” in American Control Conference, 2007.
ACC ’07, 2007, pp. 4606–4612.

[3] N. E. Leonard, D. A. Paley, F. Lekien, R. Sepulchre, D. M. Fratantoni,
and R. E. Davis, “Collective motion, sensor networks, and ocean
sampling,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 48–74, 2007.

[4] B. White, A. Tsourdos, I. Ashokaraj, S. Subchan, and R. Zbikowski,
“Contaminant cloud boundary monitoring using network of UAV sen-
sors,” Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1681–1692, 2008.
[5] R. W. Beard, T. W. McLain, D. B. Nelson, D. Kingston, and D. Jo-
hanson, “Decentralized cooperative aerial surveillance using ﬁxed wing
miniature UAVs,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 7, pp. 1306–
1324, 2006.

[6] B. Bethke, J. P. How, and J. Vian, “Multi-UAV persistent surveil-
lance with communication constraints and health management,” in
Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference,
Chicago, IL, 2009.

[7] J. Fax and R. Murray, “Information ﬂow and cooperative control of
vehicle formations,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 49,
no. 9, pp. 1465–1476, 2004.

[8] X. Li and Y. Xi, “Distributed connected coverage control for groups
of mobile agents,” International Journal of Control, vol. 83, no. 7, pp.
1347–1363, 2010.

[9] J. Redding, Z. Dydek, J. P. How, M. A. Vavrina, and J. Vian, “Proac-
tive planning for persistent missions using composite model-reference
adaptive control and approximate dynamic programming,” in American
Control Conference (ACC), 2011, pp. 2332–2337.

[10] M. Valenti, B. Bethke, J. P. How, D. P. de Farias, and J. Vian,
“Embedding health management into mission tasking for UAV teams,”
IEEE, 2007, pp. 5777–5783.
in American Control Conference, (ACC).
[11] M. Valenti, D. Dale, and J. How, “Mission health management for 24/7
persistent surveillance operations,” in AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and
Control Conference, 2007.

[12] S. A. Motevallian, C. Yu, and B. D. Anderson, “Robustness to the loss
of multiple nodes in the localizability of sensor networks,” in IFAC WC,
2011.

[13] T. H. Summers, C. Yu, and B. Anderson, “Addressing agent

loss
in vehicle formations and sensor networks,” International Journal of
Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 19, no. 15, pp. 1673–1696, 2009.

[14] A. Y. Yazıcıo˘glu, M. Egerstedt, and J. S. Shamma, “Decentralized degree
regularization for multi-agent networks,” in 52nd IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control.

IEEE, 2013.

[15] K. Akkaya, A. Thimmapuram, F. Senel, and S. Uludag, “Distributed
recovery of actor failures in wireless sensor and actor networks,” in
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC
2008.

IEEE, 2008, pp. 2480–2485.

[16] A. A. Abbasi, M. Younis, and U. Baroudi, “Recovering from a node fail-
ure in wireless sensor-actor networks with minimal topology changes,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 256–271,
2013.

[17] A. Petcu and B. Faltings, “Distributed generator maintenance schedul-
ing,” in Proceedings of the First International ICSC Symposium on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Energy Systems and Power: AIESP 06, 2006.
[18] P. Corke, S. Hrabar, R. Peterson, D. Rus, S. Saripalli, and G. Sukhatme,
“Deployment and connectivity repair of a sensor net with a ﬂying robot,”
Experimental Robotics IX, pp. 333–343, 2006.

[19] M. Ji and M. Egerstedt, “Distributed coordination control of multia-
gent systems while preserving connectedness,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 693–703, 2007.

[20] M. M. Zavlanos, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas, “Flocking while
preserving network connectivity,” in 46th IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control.

IEEE, 2007, pp. 2919–2924.

