Asynchronous deterministic rendezvous in bounded
terrains

Jurek Czyzowicz ∗†

David Ilcinkas ‡

Arnaud Labourel ∗§

Andrzej Pelc ∗¶

Abstract

Two mobile agents (robots) have to meet in an a priori unknown bounded terrain modeled
as a polygon, possibly with polygonal obstacles. Agents are modeled as points, and each of
them is equipped with a compass. Compasses of agents may be incoherent. Agents construct
their routes, but the actual walk of each agent is decided by the adversary: the movement of the
agent can be at arbitrary speed, the agent may sometimes stop or go back and forth, as long as
the walk of the agent in each segment of its route is continuous, does not leave it and covers all
of it. We consider several scenarios, depending on three factors: (1) obstacles in the terrain are
present, or not, (2) compasses of both agents agree, or not, (3) agents have or do not have a map
of the terrain with their positions marked. The cost of a rendezvous algorithm is the worst-case
sum of lengths of the agents’ trajectories until their meeting. For each scenario we design a
deterministic rendezvous algorithm and analyze its cost. We also prove lower bounds on the
cost of any deterministic rendezvous algorithm in each case. For all scenarios these bounds are
tight.

keywords: mobile agent, rendezvous, deterministic, polygon, obstacle

0
1
0
2

n
a
J

6

]

G
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
8
8
0
.
1
0
0
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗D´epartement d’informatique, Universit´e du Qu´ebec en Outaouais, Gatineau, Qu´ebec J8X 3X7, Canada. E-mails:

jurek@uqo.ca, labourel.arnaud@gmail.com, pelc@uqo.ca

†Partially supported by NSERC discovery grant.
‡LaBRI, Universit´e Bordeaux I, 33405 Talence, France. E-mail: david.ilcinkas@labri.fr
§This work was done during this author’s stay at the Universit´e du Qu´ebec en Outaouais as a postdoctoral fellow.
¶Partially supported by NSERC discovery grant and by the Research Chair in Distributed Computing at the

Universit´e du Qu´ebec en Outaouais.

 
 
 
 
 
 
1

Introduction

The problem and the model. Two mobile agents (robots) modeled as points starting at diﬀerent
locations of an a priori unknown bounded terrain have to meet. The terrain is represented as a
polygon possibly with a ﬁnite number of polygonal obstacles. We assume that the boundary of the
terrain is included in it. Thus, formally, a terrain is a set P0 \ (P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pk), where P0 is a closed
polygon and P1, . . . , Pk are disjoint open polygons included in P0. We assume that an agent knows
if it is at an interior or at a boundary point, and in the latter case it is capable of walking along the
boundary in both directions (i.e., it knows the slope(s) of the boundary at this point). However,
an agent cannot sense the terrain or the other agent at any vicinity of its current location. Meeting
(rendezvous) is deﬁned as the equality of points representing agents at some moment of time.

We assume that each agent has a unit of length and a compass. Compasses of agents may be
incoherent, however we assume that agents have the same (clockwise) orientation of their system
of coordinates. An additional tool, which may or may not be available to the agents, is a map
of the terrain. The map available to an agent is scaled (i.e., it accurately shows the distances),
distinguishes the starting positions of this agent and the other one, and is oriented according to
the compass of the agent. (Hence maps of diﬀerent agents may have diﬀerent North.)

All our considerations concern deterministic algorithms. The crucial notion is the route of the agent
which is a ﬁnite polygonal path in the terrain. The adversary initially places an agent at some
point in the terrain. The agent constructs its route in steps in the following way. In every step
the agent starts at some point v; in the ﬁrst step, v is the starting point chosen by the adversary.
The agent chooses a direction α, according to its compass, and a distance x. If the segment of
length x in direction α starting in v does not intersect the boundary of the terrain, the step ends
when the agent reaches point u at distance x from v in direction α. Otherwise, the step ends at
the closest point of the boundary in direction α. If the starting point v in a step is in a segment
of the boundary of the terrain, the agent has also an option (in this step) to follow this segment of
the boundary in any of the two directions till its end or for some given distance along it. Steps are
repeated until rendezvous, or until the route of the agent is completed.

We consider the asynchronous version of the rendezvous problem. The asynchrony of the agents’
movements is captured by the assumption that the actual walk of each agent is decided by the
adversary: the movement of the agent can be at arbitrary speed, the agent may sometimes stop or
go back and forth, as long as the walk of the agent in each segment of its route is continuous, does
not leave it and covers all of it. More formally, the route in a terrain is a sequence (S1, S2, . . . , Sk)
of segments, where Si = [ai, ai+1] is the segment corresponding to step i. In our algorithms the
route is always ﬁnite. This means that the agent stops at some point, regardless of the moves of
the other agent. We now describe the walk f of an agent on its route. Let R = (S1, S2, . . . , Sk) be
the route of an agent. Let (t1, t2, . . . , tk+1), where t1 = 0, be an increasing sequence of reals, chosen
by the adversary, that represent points in time. Let fi : [ti, ti+1] → [ai, ai+1] be any continuous
function, chosen by the adversary, such that fi(ti) = ai and fi(ti+1) = ai+1. For any t ∈ [ti, ti+1],
we deﬁne f (t) = fi(t). The interpretation of the walk f is as follows: at time t the agent is at the
point f (t) of its route and after time tk+1 the agent remains inert. This general deﬁnition of the

2

walk and the fact that it is constructed by the adversary capture the asynchronous characteristics
of the process. Throughout the paper, rendezvous means deterministic asynchronous rendezvous.

Agents with routes R1 and R2 and with walks f1 and f2 meet at time t, if points f1(t) and f2(t)
are equal. A rendezvous is guaranteed for routes R1 and R2, if the agents using these routes meet
at some time t, regardless of the walks chosen by the adversary. The trajectory of an agent is the
sequence of segments on its route until rendezvous. (The last segment of the trajectory of an agent
may be either the last segment of its route or any of its segments or a portion of it, if the other
agent is met there.) The cost of a rendezvous algorithm is the worst case sum of lengths of segments
of trajectories of both agents, where the worst case is taken over all terrains with the considered
values of parameters, and all adversarial decisions.

We consider several scenarios, depending on three factors: (1) obstacles in the terrain are present,
or not, (2) compasses of both agents agree, or not, (3) agents have or do not have a map of the
terrain. Combinations of the presence or absence of these factors give rise to eight scenarios. For
each scenario we design a deterministic rendezvous algorithm and analyze its cost. We also prove
lower bounds on the cost of any deterministic rendezvous algorithm in each case. For all scenarios
these bounds are tight.

One ﬁnal precision has to be made. For all scenarios except those with incoherent compasses
and the presence of obstacles (regardless of the availability of a map), agents may be anonymous,
i.e., they execute identical algorithms. By contrast, with the presence of obstacles and incoherent
compasses, anonymity would preclude feasibility of rendezvous in some situations. Consider a
square with one square obstacle positioned at its center. Consider two agents starting at opposite
(diagonal) corners of the larger square, with compasses pointing to opposite North directions.
If they execute identical algorithms and walk at the same speed, then at each time they are in
symmetric positions in the terrain and hence rendezvous is impossible. The only way to break
symmetry for a deterministic rendezvous in this case is to equip the agents with distinct labels
(which are positive integers). Hence, this is the assumption we make for the scenarios with the
presence of obstacles and incoherent compasses (both with and without a map). For any label µ,
we denote by |µ| the length of the binary representation of the label, i.e., |µ| = ⌊log µ⌋ + 1.

Our results. The cost of our algorithms depends on some of the following parameters (diﬀerent
parameters for diﬀerent scenarios, see the discussion in Section 4): D is the distance between
starting positions of agents in the terrain (i.e., the length of the shortest path between them
included in the terrain), P is the perimeter of the terrain, (i.e., the sum of perimeters of all
polygons P0, P1, . . . , Pk), x is the largest perimeter of an obstacle, and l and L are the smaller and
larger labels of agents, respectively, for the two scenarios that require diﬀerent labels, as remarked
above., i.e., for the scenarios with the presence of obstacles and incoherent compasses.

Our rendezvous algorithms rely on two diﬀerent ideas: either meeting in a uniquely deﬁned point
of the terrain, or meeting on a uniquely deﬁned cycle. It turns out that a uniquely deﬁned point
can be found in all scenarios except those with the presence of obstacles and incoherent compasses.
In this case even anonymous agents can meet. On the other hand, with the presence of obstacles
and incoherent compasses, such a uniquely deﬁned point may not exist, as witnessed by the above

3

quoted example of a square with one square obstacle positioned at its center. For these scenarios
we resort to the technique of meeting at a common cycle, breaking symmetry by diﬀerent labels of
agents.

We ﬁrst summarize our results concerning rendezvous when each of the agents is equipped with a
map showing its own position and that of the other agent. If compasses of the agents are coherent,
then we show a rendezvous algorithm at cost D, which is clearly optimal. Otherwise, and if the
terrain does not contain obstacles, then we show an algorithm whose cost is again D, and hence
optimal. Finally, with incoherent compasses in the presence of obstacles, we show a rendezvous
algorithm at cost O(D|l|); in the latter scenario we show that cost Ω(D|l|) is necessary for some
terrains.

Our results concerning rendezvous without a map are as follows. If compasses of the agents are
coherent, then we show a rendezvous algorithm at cost O(P ). We also show a matching lower
bound Ω(P ) in this case.
If compasses of the agents are incoherent, but the terrain does not
contain obstacles, then we show a rendezvous algorithm at cost O(P ) and again a matching lower
bound Ω(P ). Finally, in the hardest of all scenarios (presence of obstacles, incoherent compasses
and no map) we have a rendezvous algorithm at cost O(P + x|L|) and a matching lower bound
Ω(P + x|L|). Table 1 summarizes our results.

Rendezvous with a map

❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵

compasses

obstacles

Rendezvous without a map

❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵❵

compasses

obstacles

no
yes

coherent

incoherent

D

D
Θ(D|l|)

coherent

incoherent

Θ(P )

Θ(P )
Θ(P + x|L|)

no
yes

Table 1: Summary of results

Related work. The rendezvous problem was ﬁrst described in [30]. A detailed discussion of the
large literature on rendezvous can be found in the excellent book [4]. Most of the results in this
domain can be divided into two classes: those considering the geometric scenario (rendezvous in
the line, see, e.g., [10, 11, 20, 31], or in the plane, see, e.g., [7, 8]), and those discussing rendezvous
in graphs, e.g., [2, 5]. Some of the authors, e.g., [2, 3, 6, 10, 22] consider the probabilistic scenario
where inputs and/or rendezvous strategies are random. Randomized rendezvous strategies use
random walks in graphs, which were thoroughly investigated and applied also to other problems,
such as graph traversing [1], on-line algorithms [15] and estimating volumes of convex bodies [18].
A generalization of the rendezvous problem is that of gathering [19, 22, 23, 24, 27, 32], when more
than two agents have to meet in one location.

If graphs are unlabeled, deterministic rendezvous requires breaking symmetry, which can be ac-
complished either by allowing marking nodes or by labeling the agents. Deterministic rendezvous
with anonymous agents working in unlabeled graphs but equipped with tokens used to mark nodes
was considered e.g., in [26]. In [33] the authors studied the task of gathering many agents with
unique labels. In [17, 25, 34] deterministic rendezvous in graphs with labeled agents was considered.
However, in all the above papers, the synchronous setting was assumed. Asynchronous gathering
under geometric scenarios has been studied, e.g., in [13, 19, 28] in diﬀerent models than ours: agents

4

could not remember past events, but they were assumed to have at least partial visibility of the
scene. The ﬁrst paper to consider deterministic asynchronous rendezvous in graphs was [14]. The
authors concentrated on complexity of rendezvous in simple graphs, such as the ring and the inﬁ-
nite line. They also showed feasibility of deterministic asynchronous rendezvous in arbitrary ﬁnite
connected graphs with known upper bound on the size. Further improvements of the above results
for the inﬁnite line were proposed in [31]. Gathering many robots in a graph, under a diﬀerent
asynchronous model and assuming that the whole graph is seen by each robot, has been studied in
[23, 24].

2 Rendezvous with a map

We start by describing the following procedure that ﬁnds a unique shortest path from the starting
position of one agent to the other. The procedure works in all scenarios in which agents have a
map of the terrain with their positions indicated.

point u := v; path p := {v};
S = {ps | ps is a shortest path between v and w};

Procedure path UniquePath(point v, point w)
1
2
3 while (u 6= w) do
4

U :=all paths ps of S such that the ﬁrst segment of the subpath of ps leading from u
to w is the ﬁrst in clockwise order around u starting from the direction vw;

5
6
7
8

p′ := Tps∈U ps;
extend p with the connected part of p′ containing u;
u := new end of path p;

return p;

Lemma 2.1 Procedure UniquePath computes a unique shortest path from v to w, independent of
the agent computing it.

Proof: All shortest paths between two points inside a terrain can be computed as in [21]. The path
computed by the call of UniquePath(v, w) is a shortest path, since it is composed, by construction,
of parts of shortest paths between v and w. The path is computed in a deterministic way without
using the compass direction of the agent or the unit of length of the agent. Hence, it is unique. (cid:3)

2.1 Coherent compasses

If agents have a map and coherent compasses, then they can easily agree on one of their two
starting positions and meet at this point at cost D, which is optimal. This is done by the following
Algorithm RVCM (rendezvous with a map and coherent compasses).

5

Algorithm RV CM
Let v be the northernmost of the two starting positions of the agents. If both agents have the
same latitude, let v be the easternmost of them. Let w be the other starting position. The agent
starting at v remains inert. The agent starting at w computes the path p = UniquePath(w, v)
and moves along p until v.

Theorem 2.1 Algorithm RV CM guarantees rendezvous at cost D, for any two agents with a map
and coherent compasses, in any terrain.

Proof: The position v computed by the two agents is the same, since they have coherent compasses.
(cid:3)
The agents will eventually meet in v. The cost of rendezvous is D, since p is of length D.

2.2

Incoherent compasses

2.2.1 Terrains without obstacles

In an empty polygon there is a unique shortest path between starting positions of the agents [9],
and agents with a map can meet in the middle of this path at cost D, which is optimal. This is
done by Algorithm RVM (rendezvous with a map, without obstacles).

Algorithm RV M
The agent computes the (unique) shortest path between the starting positions of the two agents.
Then, it moves along this shortest path until the middle of it.

Theorem 2.2 Algorithm RV M guarantees rendezvous at cost D for any two agents with a map,
in any terrain without obstacles.

Proof: In a polygon without obstacles, the shortest path between two points is unique and can be
computed as in [21]. The two agents will eventually meet in the middle of this shortest path. The
(cid:3)
cost of rendezvous is D, since the path is of length D.

2.2.2 Terrains with obstacles

This is the ﬁrst of the two scenarios where agents cannot always predetermine a meeting point.
Therefore they compute a common embedding of a ring on which they are initially situated, and
then each agent executes the rendezvous algorithm from [14] for this ring. Rendezvous is guaranteed
to occur on the ring, but the meeting point depends on the walks of the agents determined by the
adversary. This is done by Algorithm RVMO (rendezvous with a map, with obstacles).

6

Algorithm RV M O

Phase 1: computation of the embedding∗ R of a ring of size 4.
Let v be the starting position of the agent and let w be the starting position of the other agent.
The agent computes the embedding R of a ring, composed of four nodes v, a, w and b, where a
is the midpoint of UniquePath(v, w), b is the midpoint of UniquePath(w, v), and the four edges
are the respective halves of these paths.
Phase 2: rendezvous on R.
This phase consists in applying the rendezvous algorithm from [14] for ring R, whose size (four)
is known to the agents.

aThis embedding is not necessarily homeomorphic with a circle, it may be degenerated.

Theorem 2.3 Algorithm RV M O guarantees rendezvous at cost O(D|l|) for arbitrary two agents
with a map, in any terrain.

Proof: Let a1 and a2 be the two agents that have to meet. The embedding R of the ring is
the same for the two agents by Lemma 2.1. The algorithm from [14] guarantees rendezvous and
has complexity expressed in terms of the total number of edge traversals by the agents before
rendezvous occurs, equal to O(n|l|), where n is the number of nodes of the ring and l is the smaller
of the two labels of the agents. Since the ring has size four and each of its edges has length D/2,
(cid:3)
the total cost of rendezvous is O(D|l|).

The following lower bound shows that the cost of Algorithm RVMO cannot be improved for some
terrains. Indeed, it implies that for all D > 0, there exists a polygon with a single obstacle, for
which the cost of any rendezvous algorithm for two agents, starting at distance D, is Ω(D|l|).

Theorem 2.4 For any rendezvous algorithm A, for any D > 0, and for any integers k2 ≥ k1 > 0,
there exist two labels l1 and l2 of lengths at most k1 and at most k2, respectively, and a polygon
with a single obstacle of perimeter 2D, such that algorithm A executed by agents with labels l1 and
l2 starting at distance D, requires cost Ω(Dk1). This holds even if the two agents have a map.

Proof: The idea of the proof is based on an argument from [17]. For y > 0, we consider a terrain
T that is a hexagon of side y + 2 with one hexagonal obstacle of side y with the same center. The
two agents start at positions u and v in T , as depicted in Figure 1. The compasses of agents point
in opposite directions. Observe that D = 3y. We call slices the six trapezoids bounded by two
corresponding parallel sides of the two hexagons and by the segments linking the corresponding
vertices of the hexagons. To avoid ambiguity, we say that an agent in the segment shared by two
slices is in the ﬁrst of them in clockwise order. Note that agents start in two diﬀerent slices with
two slices in between.

Fix a rendezvous algorithm A. We assume that both agents always move at the same constant
speed. We divide the execution of algorithm A into periods during which each agent traverses a
distance y. During any period, an agent can only visit the slice where it starts the period and one

7

y + 2

y

u

v

Figure 1: Terrain T

slices

of the two adjacent slices. The behavior of an agent with label l, running algorithm A, yields the
following sequence of integers from the set {−1, 0, 1}, called the behavior code. The i-th term of the
behavior code of an agent is −1 if the agent ends period i in the slice preceding (in clockwise order)
the slice in which it began the period, 1 if it ends period i in the slice following it (in clockwise
order), and 0 if it begins and ends period i in the same slice. Due to the symmetry of the ﬁgure
and to opposite compasses an agent with a given label has the same behavior code if it starts at
point u or at point v. Note that two agents with the same preﬁx of length k1 of their behavior
codes cannot accomplish rendezvous during the ﬁrst k1 periods, since they start separated by at
least two slices, and they cannot be in the same slice during any period.

There are less than 3k1/2 < 2k1 behavior codes of length at most k1/2. Hence it is possible to pick
two distinct labels l1 and l2 of lengths at most k1, respectively, such that the preﬁx of length k1/2
of their behavior codes is the same. For these labels, algorithm A does not accomplish rendezvous
(cid:3)
before both agents have travelled a distance yk1/2 = Ω(Dk1).

3 Rendezvous without a map

3.1 Coherent compasses

It turns out that agents can recognize the outer boundary of the terrain even without a map. Hence,
if their compasses are coherent, they can identify a uniquely deﬁned point on this boundary and
meet in this point. This is done by Algorithm RVC (rendezvous with coherent compasses) at cost
O(P ).

8

Algorithm RV C

From its starting position v, the agent follows the half-line α pointing to the North, as far as
possible. When it hits the boundary of a polygon P (i.e., either the external boundary of the
terrain or the boundary of an obstacle), it traverses the entire boundary of P. Then, it computes
the point u which is the farthest point from v in P ∩ α. It goes around P until reaching u again
and progresses on α, if possible. If this is impossible, the agent recognizes that it went around
the boundary of P0. It then computes the northernmost points in P0. Finally, it traverses the
boundary of P0 until reaching the easternmost of these points.

Theorem 3.1 Algorithm RV C guarantees rendezvous at cost O(P ) for any two agents with co-
herent compasses, in any terrain.

Proof: The ﬁrst phase of the algorithm that consists in reaching P0 and making the tour of the
boundary of P0 costs at most 3P , since the boundary of each polygon of the terrain is traversed
at most twice and the total length of parts of α inside the terrain is at most P . Reaching the
rendezvous point costs at most P . The agents will eventually meet in the easternmost of the
(cid:3)
northernmost points of P0, since they have coherent compasses and this point is unique.

The following lower bound shows that the cost of Algorithm RVC is asymptotically optimal, for
some polygons even without obstacles. This lower bound Ω(P ) holds even if the distance D between
starting positions of agents is bounded and if their compasses are coherent.

Theorem 3.2 There exists a polygon of an arbitrarily large perimeter P , for which the cost of any
rendezvous algorithm for two agents with coherent compasses starting at any distance D > 0, is
Ω(P ).

Proof: Consider the polygon P ′ obtained by attaching to each side of a regular k-gon, whose
center is at distance D/8 from its boundary, a rectangle of length 3D/8 and of height equal to the
side length of the k-gon. The polygon P is the polygon obtained by gluing two copies of P ′ by the
small side of one of the rectangles, as depicted in Fig. 2. Let P be the perimeter of the polygon P.
We choose k = Θ(P/D). There are two types of rectangles in P, two passing ones (they share one
side) and the 2k − 2 normal ones.

Consider all rotations of the polygon P around its center of symmetry by angles 2πi/k, for i =
0, . . . , k − 1. We will prove that any deterministic rendezvous algorithm requires cost Ω(P ) in at
least one of the rotated polygons. Each agent starts in the center of a diﬀerent k-gon. We say that
an agent has penetrated a rectangle if it has moved at distance D/8 inside the rectangle. In order
to accomplish rendezvous, at least one agent has to penetrate a passing rectangle. Each time one
agent penetrates a rectangle, the adversary chooses a rotation, so that all previously penetrated
rectangles, including the current one, are normal rectangles. This choice is coherent with the
knowledge previously acquired by the agents, since normal rectangles are undistinguishable from
each other and an agent needs to penetrate a rectangle in order to distinguish its type. Hence,

9

the two agents have to penetrate a total of k − 1 rectangles before the adversary cannot rotate the
ﬁgure to prevent the penetration of a passing rectangle. It follows that at least one of the agents
has to traverse a total distance of Ω(kD) = Ω(P ) before meeting.

passing
rectangles

y

normal
rectangles

x
D
8

3D
8

Figure 2: Polygon P

(cid:3)

3.2

Incoherent compasses

3.2.1 Terrains without obstacles

In this section, we use the notion of medial axis, proposed by Blum [12], to deﬁne a unique point
of rendezvous inside the terrain. Observe that we cannot use the centroid for the rendezvous point
since, as we also consider non-convex terrains, the centroid is not necessarily inside the terrain.
The medial axis M (P) of a polygon P is deﬁned as the set of points inside P which have more
than one closest point on the boundary of P. Actually, M (P) is a planar tree contained in P,
in which nodes are linked by either straight-line segment or arcs of parabolas [29]. We deﬁne the
medial point of a polygon P as either the central node of M (P) or the middle of the central edge
of M (P), depending on whether M (P) has a central node or a central edge. Remark that the
medial point of P is unique and is inside P. The medial axis of a polygon P can be computed as
in [16]. Algorithm RV (rendezvous without obstacles, without a map and with possibly incoherent
compasses) determines the unknown (empty) polygon and guarantees meeting in its medial point.

Algorithm RV

At its starting position, the agent chooses an arbitrary half-line α which it follows until it hits
the boundary of the polygon P0. It traverses the entire boundary of P0 and computes the medial
point v of P0. Then, it moves to v by a shortest path and stops.

Theorem 3.3 Algorithm RV guarantees rendezvous at cost O(P ) for any two agents, in any ter-
rain without obstacles.

10

Proof: The cost of reaching the boundary of P and completing a tour of it is at most 2P . The
agent can compute the medial point of the polygon and reach it at cost at most P . The two agents
(cid:3)
will eventually meet at the medial point, since it is unique.

The lower bound from Theorem 3.2 shows that the cost of Algorithm RV cannot be improved for
some polygons.

3.2.2 Terrains with obstacles

Our last rendezvous algorithm, Algorithm RV O, works for the hardest of all scenarios: rendezvous
with obstacles, no map, and possibly incoherent compasses. Here again it may be impossible to
predetermine a meeting point. Thus agents identify a common cycle and meet on this cycle. The
diﬀerence between the present setting and that of Algorithm RV M O, where a map was available,
is that now agents may start outside of the common cycle and have to reach it before attempting
rendezvous on it. Also the common cycle is diﬀerent: rather than being composed of two shortest
paths between initial positions of the agents (a map seems to be needed to ﬁnd such paths), it is
the boundary of a (possible) obstacle O in which the medial point of the outer polygon is hidden.
These changes have consequences for the cost of the algorithm. The fact that the medial point
of the outer polygon has to be found and the obstacle O has to be reached is responsible for the
summand P in the cost. The only bound on the perimeter of this obstacle is x. Finally, the fact
that the adversary may delay the agent with the smaller label and force the other agent to make its
tours of obstacle O before the agent with the smaller label even reaches the obstacle, is responsible
for the summand x|L|, rather than x|l|, in the cost.

A cycle is a polygonal path whose both extremities are the same point. A tour of a cycle C is
any sequence of all the segments of C in either clockwise or counterclockwise order starting from a
vertex of C. By extension, a partial tour of C is a path which is a subsequence of a tour of C with
the ﬁrst or the last segment of the subsequence possibly replaced by a subsegment of it.

11

Algorithm RV O

Phase 1: Computation of the medial point of P0
At its starting position z, the agent chooses an arbitrary half-line α which it follows as far as
possible. When it hits the boundary of a polygon P, it traverses the entire boundary of P. Then,
it computes the point w which is the farthest point from z in P ∩ α. It goes around P until
reaching w again and progresses on α, if possible. If this is impossible, the agent recognizes that
it went around the boundary of P0. The agent computes the medial point v of P0.
Phase 2: Moving to the medial point of P0
Let u be the current position of the agent. The agent follows the segment uv as far as possible.
Similarly as in the ﬁrst phase of the algorithm, if the agent hits a polygon P, it traverses the
entire boundary of P. Then, it computes the point w which is the farthest point from u in P ∩ uv.
It goes around P until reaching w again and progresses on α, if possible. If this is impossible and
if the point v has not been reached, the agent recognizes that the point v is inside an obstacle
O, and executes phase 3. If the agent reaches v, it does not enter phase 3 of the algorithm and
stops.
Phase 3: Rendezvous around the medial obstacle of the terrain
The agent goes around the obstacle O until it reaches a vertex s. The agent produces the modiﬁed
label µ∗ consisting of the binary representation of the label µ of the agent followed by a 1 and
then followed by |µ| zeros. This phase consists of |µ∗| stages. In stage i, the agent completes
two tours of the boundary of O, starting and ending in s, clockwise if the i-th bit of µ∗ is 1 and
counterclockwise otherwise.

Let u1u2 and u2u3 be consecutive segments in clockwise order (resp. counterclockwise order) of a
cycle. For a given walk f of an agent a, we say that the agent traverses in a clockwise way (resp.
in a counterclockwise way) a vertex u2 of a cycle at time t if f (t) = u2 and there exist positive reals
ǫ1 and ǫ2 and points y and z such that y = f (t − ǫ1) is an internal point of u1u2, z = f (t + ǫ2) is
an internal point of u2u3 and the agent walks in u1u2 ∪ u2u3 during the time period [t − ǫ1, t + ǫ2].

Before establishing the correctness and cost of Algorithm RV O, we need to show the following two
lemmas.

Lemma 3.1 Consider two agents on cycle C. Suppose that one agent executes a tour of C in some
sense of rotation, starting and ending in v. If during the same period of time, the other agent either
traverses v for the ﬁrst time in the other sense of rotation or does not traverse it at all, then the
two agents meet.

Proof: Let f1 and f2 be the walks of agents a1 and a2, respectively. Let t′ be the moment when
agent a1 starts its tour of C at some vertex v. Let t′′ be the moment when agent a1 ends its tour,
if agent a2 does not traverse v in the same period of time, or, otherwise, the ﬁrst moment after
t′ when agent a2 traverses v. We cut cycle C at vertex v obtaining the path p with extremities v′
and v′′ that are copies of v. The walks f1 and f2, during the time period [t′, t′′], can be transposed
in p, since neither of the two agents traverses v during the period (t′, t′′). For any t ∈ [t′, t′′], let
di(t) be the distance of agent ai from v′ at time t, counted on p. The two functions d1 and d2

12

are continuous, since the walks of both agents on p are continuous. Notice that, since the ﬁrst
traversal of v by agent a2 may be only in the sense of rotation opposite to that of agent a1, we have
f1(t′) = v′ and either f2(t′′) = v′ or f1(t′′) = v′′. Let δ(t) = d1(t) − d2(t). We have δ(t′) = d′ ≤ 0
and δ(t′′) = d′′ ≥ 0, since d1(t′) = 0 and d1(t′′) ≥ d2(t′′). The function δ is thus a continuous
function from the interval [t′, t′′] onto some interval [c′, c′′], where c′ ≤ d′ and c′′ ≥ d′′. Since 0
belongs to the interval [c′, c′′], there must exist a moment t in the interval [t′, t′′], for which δ(t) = 0.
(cid:3)
For this moment, f1(t) = f2(t) and the rendezvous occurs.

Lemma 3.2 Consider two agents on a cycle C and let k ≥ 0 be an integer. If an agent executes
either a partial tour of C followed by at most k tours of C, or at most k tours of C followed by a
partial tour of C, while the second agent executes k + 2 tours of C, then the two agents meet.

Proof: Assume for contradiction that the two agents never meet. During each tour of C by the
second agent, the ﬁrst agent has to traverse the starting position v of the second agent, in view of
Lemma 3.1. Hence, the ﬁrst agent has traversed k + 2 times vertex v. Notice that an agent cannot
traverse v without executing a tour of C as v is an extremity of a segment of its route. Hence the
ﬁrst agent has completed at least k + 1 complete tours of C starting and ending at v. Finally, the
(cid:3)
ﬁrst agent has started executing its tours at point v, a contradiction.

Theorem 3.4 Algorithm RV O guarantees rendezvous at cost O(P + x|L|) for any two agents in
any terrain for which x is the largest perimeter of an obstacle.

Proof: Let a1 and a2 be the two agents that have to meet. The ﬁrst phase of the algorithm that
consists in reaching P0 and making the tour of the boundary of P0 costs at most 3P , since the
boundary of each polygon of the terrain is traversed at most twice and the total length of parts of
α inside the terrain is at most P . For the same reason as in phase 1, the total cost of phase 2 is at
most 3P .

If the medial point of P0 is inside the terrain, then the agents meet at the end of phase 2 at total
cost of at most 12P . Otherwise, both agents eventually enter phase 3 of the algorithm and they
are on the boundary of the obstacle O containing the medial point of P0. The cost follows from
the fact that each agent travels a distance O(x|L|) in phase 3. Indeed, each agent executes at most
2|L| + 1 stages and each stage costs at most 2x. Hence it remains to show that rendezvous occurs
in this case as well.

Assume for contradiction that the two agents never meet. Notice that the modiﬁed label l∗ cannot
be the suﬃx of the modiﬁed label L∗. Indeed, if |l∗| = |L∗| then the two labels are diﬀerent since
l 6= L, and otherwise the second part of l∗, consisting of 1 followed by |l| zeros, cannot be the
suﬃx of L∗. Hence, there exists an index i such that the (|l∗| − i)-th bit of l∗ diﬀers from the
(|L∗| − i)-th bit of L∗. We call important stages the (|l∗| − i)-th stage of the agent with label l and
the (|L∗| − i)-th stage of the agent with label L.

For j = 1, 2, let tj be the moment when agent aj enters its important stage and let t′ be the ﬁrst
moment when both agents have ﬁnished the execution of the algorithm. Suppose by symmetry

13

that t1 ≤ t2, i.e., agent a1 was the ﬁrst to enter its important stage. Then a2 must have entered
its important stage during the ﬁrst tour of the important stage of a1. Otherwise, agent a2 would
have completed 2i + 2 tours between t2 and t′, while agent a1 would have completed at most 2i + 1
tours. Hence, the two agents would have met in view of Lemma 3.2. Hence, from the time t2, agent
a2 completes one tour in some sense of rotation, starting and ending at a vertex v, while agent
a1 either traverses v for the ﬁrst time in the other sense of rotation or does not traverse it at all.
(cid:3)
Hence by Lemma 3.1, the two agents meet.

The following result gives a lower bound matching the cost of Algorithm RVO.

Theorem 3.5 There exist terrains for which the cost of any rendezvous algorithm is Ω(P + x|L|).
This holds for arbitrarily small D > 0.

Proof: Since our lower bound is expressed as a sum, in order to prove it, we show two examples,
one in which the ﬁrst summand is as small as possible and the bound is equal to the other summand,
and vice-versa. The ﬁrst example uses the polygon from Theorem 2.4: P must be at least x and
in this example we have P = Θ(x) and the lower bound is Ω(x|L|). Indeed, consider two integers
m2 ≤ m1. By Theorem 2.4, applied for k1 = k2 = m1, and for any rendezvous algorithm A, there
exists a label L of length m1, such that the sum of lengths of segments of the route produced by
the execution of A by an agent a1 with label L is Ω(xm1). The adversary chooses as the initial
position of the second agent a2 any point outside a path p of length Θ(xm1), which is a preﬁx of
the route of agent a1. This point can be chosen arbitrarily close to the initial position of the ﬁrst
agent. The label of agent a2 is of length m2. Suppose that the start of agent a2 is delayed by the
adversary and occurs when p is entirely traversed by agent a1. The two agents do not meet during
this traversal of p by the ﬁrst agent and so the cost of rendezvous is Ω(xm1) = Ω(x|L|). The second
example is given by the proof of Theorem 3.2. Indeed, in this example there are no obstacles and
(cid:3)
hence x = x|L| = 0, while the lower bound is Ω(P ).

4 Discussion of parameters

We presented rendezvous algorithms, analyzed their cost and proved matching lower bounds in all
considered scenarios. However, it is important to note that the formulas describing the cost depend
on the chosen parameters in each case. All our results have the following form. For a given scenario
we choose some parameters (among D, P , x, l, L), show an algorithm whose cost in any terrain
is O(f ), where f is some simple function of the chosen parameters, and then prove that for some
class of terrains any rendezvous algorithm requires cost Ω(f ), which shows that the complexity of
our algorithm cannot be improved in general, for the chosen parameters.

This yields the question which parameters should be chosen. In the case of complexities D and
Θ(P ), this choice does not seem controversial, as here D and P are very natural parameters, and
the only ones in these simple cases. However, for the two scenarios with incoherent compasses and
with the presence of obstacles, there are several other possible parameters, and their choice may

14

raise a doubt. As mentioned in the introduction, in these two scenarios, distinct labels of agents
are necessary to break symmetry, since rendezvous is impossible for anonymous agents. Hence any
rendezvous algorithm has to use labels l and L as inputs, and thus the choice of these labels as
parameters seems natural. By contrast, the choice of parameter x may seem more controversial.
Why do we want to express the cost of a rendezvous algorithm in terms of the largest perimeter of
an obstacle? Are there other natural choices of parameter sets? What are their implications?

Let us start by pondering the second question. It is not hard to give examples of other natural
choices of parameters for the two scenarios with incoherent compasses and with the presence of
obstacles. For example, in the hardest scenario (without a map), we could drop parameter x and
try to express the cost of the same Algorithm RVO only in terms of D, P , l, and L. Since x ≤ P , we
would get O(P |L|) instead of O(P + x|L|). Incidentally, as in our lower bound example of terrains
we have x = Θ(P ), this new complexity O(P |L|) is optimal for the same reason as the former one.

Another possibility would be adding, instead of dropping a parameter. We could, for example, add
the parameter Pe which is the length of the external perimeter of the terrain, i.e., the perimeter of
polygon P0. Then it becomes natural to modify Algorithm RVO as follows. The ﬁrst two phases are
the same. In the third phase, the agent goes around obstacle O and compares its perimeter to Pe.
If the perimeter of O is smaller (or equal), then the algorithm proceeds as before, and if it is larger,
then the agent goes back to the boundary of P0 and executes Phase 3 on this boundary instead
of the boundary of O. The new algorithm has complexity O(P + min(x, Pe)|L|). Its complexity is
again optimal because in our lower bound example we can choose the parameter y = min(x, Pe)
and enlarge the largest of the two boundaries by lengthy but thin zigzags. Thus we can preserve
the lower bound Ω(P + min(x, Pe)|L|), even when x and Pe diﬀer signiﬁcantly.

The reason why we chose parameters D, P , l, L, and x instead of just D, P , l and L, is that
complexity O(P + x|L|) shows a certain continuity of the complexity of Algorithm RVO with
respect to the sizes of obstacles: when the largest obstacle decreases, this complexity approaches
O(P ) and it becomes O(P ) if there are no obstacles.
In this case our algorithm coincides with
Algorithm RV. This is not the case with complexity O(P |L|). On the other hand, this choice
coincides with O(P + min(x, Pe)|L|) in many important cases, for example for convex obstacles
(as then we have x < Pe).

It is then natural to ask what happens if we add parameter x in the scenario with incoherent
compasses and with the presence of obstacles but with the map. Obviously we could still use
Algorithm RVO and get complexity O(P + x|L|). However, our lower bound argument in this
scenario gives in fact only Ω(D + min(x, D)|l|). In our example we had D = Θ(x) but we only get
Ω(D + x|l|) even if D is much larger than x. On the other hand, if D is much smaller than x we
can only get the lower bound Ω(D|l|) because it matches the complexity of RV M O in this case.
Hence it is natural to ask if there exists a rendezvous algorithm with cost O(D + min(x, D)|l|) for
arbitrary terrains in this scenario. We leave this as an open question.

15

References

[1] R. Aleliunas, R.M. Karp, R.J. Lipton, L. Lov´asz, and C. Rackoﬀ, Random walks, univer-
sal traversal sequences, and the complexity of maze problems, Proc. Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science FOCS’1979, 218-223.

[2] S. Alpern, The rendezvous search problem, SIAM J. on Control and Optimization 33 (1995),

673-683.

[3] S. Alpern, Rendezvous search on labelled networks, Naval Reaserch Logistics 49 (2002), 256-

274.

[4] S. Alpern and S. Gal, The theory of search games and rendezvous. Int. Series in Operations
research and Management Science, number 55, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. Kluwer
Academic Publisher, 2002.

[5] J. Alpern, V. Baston, and S. Essegaier, Rendezvous search on a graph, Journal of Applied

Probability 36 (1999), 223-231.

[6] E. Anderson and R. Weber, The rendezvous problem on discrete locations, Journal of Applied

Probability 28 (1990), 839-851.

[7] E. Anderson and S. Fekete, Asymmetric rendezvous on the plane, Proc. 14th Annual ACM

Symp. on Computational Geometry, 1998.

[8] E. Anderson and S. Fekete, Two-dimensional rendezvous search, Operations Research 49

(2001), 107-118.

[9] E. M. Arkin, J. S. B. Mitchell and C. D. Piatko, Bicriteria shortest path problems in the plane,

In Proc. 3rd Canad. Conf. Comput. Geom, 153-156, 1991.

[10] V. Baston and S. Gal, Rendezvous on the line when the players’ initial distance is given by an
unknown probability distribution, SIAM J. on Control and Optimization 36 (1998), 1880-1889.

[11] V. Baston and S. Gal, Rendezvous search when marks are left at the starting points, Naval

Res. Log. 48 (2001), 722-731.

[12] H. Blum, A transformation for extracting new descriptors of shape. In W. Whaten-Dunn,
Proc. Symp. Models for Perception of Speech and Visual Form, 362-380. MIT Press, 1967.

[13] M. Cieliebak, P. Flocchini, G. Prencipe, N. Santoro, Solving the Robots Gathering Problem,
Proc. 30th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP
2003), 1181-1196.

[14] G. De Marco, L. Gargano, E. Kranakis, D. Krizanc, A. Pelc, U. Vaccaro, Asynchronous deter-

ministic rendezvous in graphs, Theoretical Computer Science 355 (2006), 315-326.

16

[15] D. Coppersmith, P. Doyle, P. Raghavan, and M. Snir, Random walks on weighted graphs,
and applications to on-line algorithms, Proc. 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing ( STOC’1990), 369-378.

[16] F. Chin, J. Snoeyink, and C. A. Wang, Finding the Medial Axis of a Simple Polygon in Linear

Time, Discrete Comput. Geom., 382–391, 1995.

[17] A. Dessmark, P. Fraigniaud, D. Kowalski, and A. Pelc, Deterministic rendezvous in graphs,

Algorithmica 46 (2006), 69-96.

[18] M. Dyer, A. Frieze, and R. Kannan, A random polynomial time algorithm for estimating
volumes of convex bodies, Proc. 21st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
(STOC’1989), 375-381.

[19] P. Flocchini, G. Prencipe, N. Santoro, P. Widmayer, Gathering of asynchronous oblivious
robots with limited visibility, Proc. 18th Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Com-
puter Science STACS’2001, LNCS 2010, 247-258.

[20] S. Gal, Rendezvous search on the line, Operations Research 47 (1999), 974-976.

[21] J. Hershberger and S. Suri, An Optimal Algorithm for Euclidean Shortest Paths in the Plane,

SIAM J. Comput. 28, 2215-2256, 1997.

[22] A. Israeli and M. Jalfon, Token management schemes and random walks yield self stabilizing

mutual exclusion, Proc. PODC’1990, 119-131.

[23] R. Klasing, A. Kosowski, A. Navarra, Taking advantage of symmetries: gathering of asyn-
chronous oblivious robots on a ring. Proc. 12th International Conference on Principles of
Distributed Systems, (OPODIS 2008), 446-462.

[24] R. Klasing, E. Markou, A. Pelc, Gathering asynchronous oblivious mobile robots in a ring,

Theoretical Computer Science 390 (2008), 27-39.

[25] D. Kowalski, A. Malinowski, How to meet in anonymous network. Theoretical Computer Sci-

ence 399 (2008), 141-156.

[26] E. Kranakis, D. Krizanc, N. Santoro and C. Sawchuk, Mobile agent rendezvous in a ring, Proc.
23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’2003), 592-599.

[27] W. Lim and S. Alpern, Minimax rendezvous on the line, SIAM J. on Control and Optimization

34 (1996), 1650-1665.

[28] G. Prencipe, Impossibility of gathering by a set of autonomous mobile robots, Theoretical

Computer Science 384 (2007), 222-231.

[29] F. P. Preperata, The medial axis of a simple polygon, Mathematical Foundations of Computer

Science (LNCS), 53:443-450,1977

[30] T. Schelling, The strategy of conﬂict, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1960.

17

[31] G. Stachowiak, Asynchronous Deterministic Rendezvous on the Line, SOFSEM 2009: 497-508.

[32] L. Thomas, Finding your kids when they are lost, Journal on Operational Res. Soc. 43 (1992),

637-639.

[33] X. Yu and M. Yung, Agent rendezvous: a dynamic symmetry-breaking problem, Proc. Inter-
national Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP’1996), LNCS 1099,
610-621.

[34] A. Ta-Shma, U. Zwick, Deterministic rendezvous, treasure hunts and strongly universal explo-
ration sequences., Proc. 18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA
2007), 599-608.

18

