Self-Organized Agents: A LLM Multi-Agent Framework toward
Ultra Large-Scale Code Generation and Optimization

Yoichi Ishibashi
TsukushiAI
ishibashi.tsukushiai@gmail.com

Yoshimasa Nishimura
TsukushiAI
nishimura.tsukushiai@gmail.com

Abstract

Recent advancements in automatic code gener-
ation using large language model (LLM) agent
have brought us closer to the future of auto-
mated software development. However, exist-
ing single-agent approaches face limitations
in generating and improving large-scale, com-
plex codebases due to constraints in context
length. To tackle this challenge, we propose
Self-Organized multi-Agent framework (SoA),
a novel multi-agent framework that enables the
scalable and efficient generation and optimiza-
tion of large-scale code. In SoA, self-organized
agents operate independently to generate and
modify code components while seamlessly col-
laborating to construct the overall codebase. A
key feature of our framework is the automatic
multiplication of agents based on problem com-
plexity, allowing for dynamic scalability. This
enables the overall code volume to be increased
indefinitely according to the number of agents,
while the amount of code managed by each
agent remains constant. We evaluate SoA on
the HumanEval benchmark and demonstrate
that, compared to a single-agent system, each
agent in SoA handles significantly less code,
yet the overall generated code is substantially
greater. Moreover, SoA surpasses the powerful
single-agent baseline by 5% in terms of Pass@1
accuracy. 1

4
2
0
2

r
p
A
2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
8
1
2
0
.
4
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Left (single agent): A single agent is solely
responsible for the entire implementation. As the code-
base grows larger, the load increases for code genera-
tion, modification, and memory management, making
it difficult to manage and develop. The larger the en-
tire codebase becomes, the more it puts pressure on
the context length during self-debugging, limiting the
amount of code that can be managed. Right (SoA): The
implementation is distributed among multiple agents.
The agents are independent; code generation, modifi-
cation, and memory management are separated from
other agents. Each agent manages only its own part,
allowing it to focus on the implementation regardless
of the complexity of the entire codebase. Furthermore,
agents automatically multiply according to the com-
plexity of the problem. This allows for the generation
and modification of complex and large-scale code while
maintaining a constant amount of code management/-
generation/modification per agent.

1

Introduction

In recent years, research on agents using Large
Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020;
OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), such as Re-
Act (Yao et al., 2023b), Reflexion (Shinn et al.,
2023), Toolformer (Schick et al., 2023), and Auto-
GPT 2, has been expanding the possibilities of au-
tomating human tasks. These advancements have
particularly contributed to the rapid development

1Our code will be available at https://github.com/

tsukushiAI/self-organized-agent.

2https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/

of automatic code generation techniques in the
field of automated application and tool develop-
ment (Hong et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023). Compared to non-agent-based meth-
ods (Muennighoff et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b),
these research achievements have led to remark-
able performance improvements in automatic code
generation (Zhong et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023).
Most recent research has focused on single-agent
approaches for code generation. These single-agent
code generation methods face limitations, espe-
cially in terms of scalability, when the implemen-

Self-organized Agents (SoA)Single agentLimited scalability✗Total Code SizeCode Size  per agentScalable code generation/improvement✔!"Total Code SizeCode Size  per agentMax context  lengthMax context  length 
 
 
 
 
 
tation becomes complex and requires a large code-
base. The main reason for this technical difficulty is
that a single agent must manage the entire code gen-
eration process alone. For instance, implementing a
machine learning algorithm involves several stages,
such as data preprocessing, algorithm training, and
result evaluation, which include many functions
and classes. When these complex components are
combined, the codebase inevitably becomes very
large. However, there are limitations to the con-
text length of LLMs, and as the number of input
tokens increases, the inference performance de-
creases (Levy et al., 2024; Shaham et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023a). Consistently understanding and
generating or modifying appropriate code for such
an extensive codebase poses a significant challenge
for a single agent in terms of comprehending and
managing the context. Consequently, the single-
agent approach struggles to efficiently generate and
modify code as its complexity and size increase.

To tackle these challenges, we propose a self-
organized multi agent framework that can auto-
matically generate and modify large-scale code
(Figure 1). Self-organization (Ashby, 1947) is a
phenomenon in which living organisms or matter
create an orderly, large structure as a result of their
individual autonomous behaviors, despite lacking
the ability to oversee the entire system.
In our
framework, self-organized agents, each responsible
for different code parts or tasks, independently gen-
erate and modify code. With the self-organization
of agents, a single agent no longer needs to com-
prehend the entire codebase, making it possible to
scale up large-scale code simply by increasing the
number of agents. Another feature of our frame-
work is that agents automatically multiply accord-
ing to the complexity of the problem, allowing
the overall codebase to expand while keeping the
amount of code handled by each agent constant.
These features enable the dynamic and flexible gen-
eration and modification of large-scale code, which
was impossible with the traditional single-agent
approach.

In our experiments, we evaluated the perfor-
mance of this framework using HumanEval (Chen
et al., 2021), a benchmark for code generation. The
results show that our self-organized multi-agent
framework outperformed Reflexion (Shinn et al.,
2023), an existing powerful code generation agent
(§4.1), demonstrating the effectiveness of our ap-
proach in generating and modifying code. Further-
more, through a detailed analysis of the experimen-

tal results, we revealed how agents automatically
multiply according to the complexity of the prob-
lem, effectively scaling up the overall code vol-
ume while keeping the code generation per agent
constant (§ 4.2). These experimental results sup-
port the contribution of our framework, which over-
comes the scalability issues faced by single-agent
approaches and provides a solution capable of han-
dling larger projects.

2 Code Generation Task

The code generation task involves generating
Python functions from docstrings (Chen et al.,
2021). In this task, an agent is given a docstring
that defines the types of the function’s inputs and
expected outputs, as well as the specific require-
ments that the function should meet. The agent is
then required to generate the code for a function
that fulfills the specified functionality. The gener-
ated code is verified for accuracy using unit tests,
and the quality of the code is evaluated based on
its ability to pass the test cases. As with previ-
ous studies (Shinn et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024;
Zhou et al., 2023), we use the evaluation metric
Pass@1 (Chen et al., 2021), where a problem is
considered solved if any of the k code samples
pass all test cases.

3 Self-organized Agent Framework

Our Self-organized Agents (SoA) framework en-
ables efficient implementation of large-scale and
complex code by having self-organized agents in-
dependently generate and modify small-scale and
simple code. In this section, we introduce the im-
portant components of SoA, namely the agents and
the layers responsible for more abstract process-
ing than the agents, and finally introduce the code
generation and modification protocols in the SoA
framework.

3.1 Child Agent

Child agents implement a given function based on
its docstrings. As shown in Figure 2, this agent has
a simple structure consisting of two elements: an
LLM and memory. The LLM generates code from
the given docstrings and modifies the code based
on the results of unit tests. The memory stores the
code generated by the agent itself and retrieves the
latest code to be input to the LLM along with the
unit test feedback during code modification. If an
agent has these minimal specifications, it is possi-

ble to use an off-the-shelf agents (e.g., Reflexion)
as a Child agent. We deliberately use a simple
agent to verify the effectiveness of SoA in a simple
setup.

Code Generation The main role of Child agents
is to generate functions that meet the specifications
based on the given function’s docstrings. As shown
in Figure 2, the agent follows the instructions to
generate the rest of the function and complete it.
The completed function implementation is stored
in memory, and the unit tests for the function are
also stored as they form the basis for future code
modifications.

Code Modification: Empowering Child Agents
with Self-Organization and Adaptability One
of the most remarkable aspects of agents in the
SoA framework is their ability to autonomously
improve their code based on the state of nearby
agents . This process sets SoA apart from tradi-
tional agent approaches and showcases the power
of self-organization in code modification. While
existing agents like Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023)
rely solely on the results of unit tests, Child agents
in SoA go beyond this limitation by independently
observing the state of their mother agent, such as
differences in modifications and feedback. By gath-
ering this invaluable information from their sur-
rounding environment, Child agents can adapt their
behavior and make more informed decisions about
code modification, even without explicit instruc-
tions. The modifications and feedback generated
by the Mother agent serve as an important source
of information for the Child agents. Armed with
these insights, Child agents can more effectively
modify their own code, contributing to the over-
all improvement of the codebase in a way that is
both efficient and adaptive. Figure 3 illustrates this
process, which begins with the execution of unit
tests and the retrieval of the latest implementation
from memory. The Child agent then harnesses the
power of the LLM to create a code modification
proposal, seamlessly combining the information ob-
served from the Mother agent with the test results
and the latest implementation details. By storing
the modified code in memory, Child agents cre-
ate a feedback loop that continuously refines and
improves the codebase over time. This iterative pro-
cess, driven by the principles of self-organization
and adaptability, enables SoA to tackle complex
code modification tasks with efficiency and effec-
tiveness. As Child agents work in harmony with

their Mother agent, they contribute to the creation
of a more optimized and large codebase.

3.2 Mother Agent

The Mother is an agent that generates new agents
(Mother or Child). Similar to Child agents, the
Mother agent independently implements the spe-
cific Python function based on its given docstrings.
The Mother has memory, code generation capa-
bilities, and self-debugging functions, as same as
Child agents. The unique feature of the Mother
agent is its ability to generate multiple Child agents
according to the complexity of the problem and del-
egate parts of the implementation to these agents.
This structure allows the Mother agent to focus on
implementing abstract processes, while the Child
agents generated by the Mother agent concentrate
on implementing concrete processes. This divi-
sion of labor enhances the overall efficiency and
flexibility of the SoA framework.

Code Generation We explain the code genera-
tion process by the Mother agent using the imple-
mentation example of the is_sum_of_odds_ten
function shown in Figure 2. The starting point is
the function’s docstrings and unit tests, which are
memorized for reference in the later self-debugging
phase. The first task of the Mother agent is to
generate a skeleton of the implementation from
the given docstrings, including subfunctions such
as get_odd_numbers to extract odd numbers and
sum_of_numbers to calculate their sum. The num-
ber and types of these subfunctions are automati-
cally determined by the LLM based on the com-
plexity of the problem.

It is important to note that these subfunctions
are unimplemented, and the Mother agent does not
directly implement them. Instead, it delegates the
implementation of the subfunctions to other agents,
allowing the Mother agent to focus on generating
the skeleton and streamline its own code generation
process. After the docstrings and unit tests for the
subfunctions are generated, they are assigned to
newly initialized agents for implementation. These
agents proceed with the implementation of their
respective functions without looking at the inter-
nals of the is_sum_of_odds_ten function imple-
mented by the Mother agent. Since agents within
the same Mother can work asynchronously, the
overall code generation process is streamlined.

Code Modification The Mother’s code modifica-
tion is almost the same as the Child’s code modifi-

Figure 2: Overview of code generation. Child agents generate executable Python function from a given docstring.
The Mother agent generates the skeleton of the function. The Mother spawns a new initialized agent (Child or
Mother) and delegates unimplemented functions.

cation (Figure 3). It observes information from the
upper Mother and uses it to modify the functions
it is responsible for. The only difference is that the
feedback it generates and the code before and after
modification are used by lower-level agents (Child
or Mother).

3.3 Self-organized Agent Process

The Self-organized Agent (SoA) framework is a
distributed framework in which multiple agents (in-
cluding Mother agents and Child agents) repeatedly
generate and modify functions. The core of this
framework lies in the principle of self-organization,
where each agent functions independently without
the need to directly observe the entire codebase.
The hierarchical combination of Mother agents
and Child agents forms an agent network that ef-
fectively constructs a single large-scale codebase.
In this hierarchical structure, Mother agents de-
compose complex problems into more manageable
smaller problems by dividing tasks and delegating
them to the agents they have generated. Although
each agent is independent, the agents as a whole
can work efficiently towards the implementation of
a single function. Despite the fact that the amount
of code each agent generates, modifies, and man-
ages is always small, the number of agents scales,
allowing the amount of code generated to be in-
creased indefinitely according to the difficulty of
the problem. Detailed algorithms are presented in

Algorithm 1 in the appendix.

Code Generation The code generation process
in the SoA framework begins with the function’s
docstrings and unit tests. In the initial stage, there
is only one initialized Mother agent, which is the
root of the tree structure. Based on the input doc-
strings and unit tests, it generates docstrings and
unit tests for subtasks and passes them to other
agents it generates (see §3.2). If the tree structure
reaches a predetermined depth, the tasks are passed
to Child agents; otherwise, they are passed to newly
generated Mother agents. By repeatedly prolifer-
ating and increasing the number of agents until
the last agent, it is possible to generate large-scale
code while keeping the amount of code managed
by individual agents constant.

Code Modification Once code generation is
complete, the process transitions to the code mod-
ification phase. First, the implementations of all
agents are combined to create the final implementa-
tion. This final implementation is evaluated using
the unit tests provided to the root Mother, and feed-
back is generated from the results. Since there are
no agents higher than this root Mother, information
from higher-level agents as shown in Figure 3 is
not used. The modification process starts based on
this feedback and propagates information from the
root Mother agent to the Child agents. Each agent
updates its implementation based on the received

ChildDocstringsUnit testMotherUnit testUnit testCodeSTEP1:  Generate the skeletonMemorySTEP2: Update memorydef is_sum_of_odds_ten(lst):     ‘’’     Checks if sum of      odd numbers is 10     ’’’     passassert is_sum_of_odds_ten([1,9]) == TrueLLMSTEP3: Generate signature and unit tests child or motherchild or motherassert get_odd_numbers([1,2,3]) == [1, 3]assert sum_numbers([1,3]) == 4LLMdef sum_numbers(lst):     '''     Calculates the sum of numbers.          ‘’’     passdef get_odd_numbers(lst):     '''     Extracts the odd numbers.      ‘’'     passdef is_sum_of_odds_ten(lst):     ‘’'Checks if sum of odd numbers is 10     ’’’     odd_numbers = get_odd_numbers(lst)     sum_odds = sum_numbers(odd_numbers)     return “Yes” if sum_odds == 10 else “No”DocstringsUnit testCodeSTEP1:  Generate the codeMemorySTEP2: Update memoryLLMdef get_odd_numbers(lst):     '''     Extracts the odd numbers from a given      list of numbers.     ‘''     odd_numbers = [n for n in lst                     if n % 2 != 0]     return odd_numbersdef get_odd_numbers(lst):     '''     Extracts the odd numbers      from a given list of numbers.     ‘’'     passassert get_odd_numbers([1,2,3]) == [1, 3]Baselines We compare SoA with several state-of-
the-art code generation methods including Alpha-
Code (Li et al., 2022), Incoder (Fried et al., 2023),
Codex (Chen et al., 2021), CoT (Wei et al., 2022),
and Gemini Pro (Anil et al., 2023). Additionally,
we evaluate the performance of various GPT-3.5-
based agents, such as ChatGPT, Self-Edit (Zhang
et al., 2023), and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023).
These baselines are chosen to represent a diverse
range of approaches, including single-agent and
multi-agent systems, as well as those with and with-
out self-debugging capabilities.

Agent Configuration To evaluate the effective-
ness of the SoA framework, we selected the Re-
flexion agent as a baseline. Reflexion iteratively
modifies code based on the given docstrings and
automatically generated unit tests until it reaches
the maximum number of iterations or passes the
unit tests. The main difference between Reflexion
and SoA is that Reflexion is composed of a single
agent, while SoA is composed of self-organized
multiple agents. In the SoA configuration, we set
the maximum number of iterations for the learn-
ing loop to 8 and the maximum tree depth to 2.
Additionally, following (Shinn et al., 2023), we
provided a few-shot trajectory to the LLM.

Data and Tasks To evaluate the performance
of automatic code generation, we used the Hu-
manEval (Chen et al., 2021) benchmark. Hu-
manEval is a set that includes diverse programming
problems designed to measure the functional cor-
rectness of generated code. We used the Python
language set for evaluation and followed the evalua-
tion methodology of Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023).
In this process, multiple test cases are created for
each generated code, and n test cases are randomly
selected to construct a test suite. This test suite is
used to verify whether the generated code functions
correctly. We set 6 unit tests for Reflexion and 1
unit test for SoA.

4.1 Main Results

Table 1 compares the Pass@1 accuracy of the pro-
posed method and the baseline. Comparing SoA
with Reflexion, a strong baseline, SoA outperforms
Reflexion by 5% in Pass@1. Considering that each
agent in SoA does not see the entire code, this is
a surprising result. This result suggests that self-
organized agents can generate code that functions
well as a whole without needing to oversee the

Figure 3: Overview of code modification. Agents
(Mother/Child) observe the state of Mother (feedback,
old code, and updated code) and use this information
to improve the functions for which they are responsi-
ble. The state of the upper agent is used to modify code
by lower agents within the hierarchy. This state propa-
gation promotes collaboration and information sharing
throughout the hierarchy, enabling efficient code modi-
fication.

feedback, generates new feedback, and transmits it
to lower-level agents (see §3.2). Finally, the Child
agents update their own implementations, and the
process terminates (see § 3.1). This series of pro-
cesses is repeated until a predetermined maximum
number of iterations is reached.

4 Experiments

LLM Selection We used GPT3.5-turbo3 for code
generation and feedback generation.4

3gpt3.5-turbo-1106
4GPT-4 was not selected due to the high experimental cost

required.

STEP3:  Fix codeTest  resultUnit testSTEP1: Observe  upper agentMotherUpper MotherMemoryLLMLLMSTEP2:  Generate self-feedbacks(1) Return a Boolean value. (2) In 'get_odd_numbers',  　　ignore negative numbers.CodeSTEP4:  Update  memoryOld codeSTEP3:  Fix codeTest  resultUnit testSTEP1:  Observe mother agentMemoryLLMLLMSTEP2:  Generate self-feedbacks(1) Ignore numbers that are negative.CodeSTEP4:  Update  memoryOld codedef get_odd_numbers(lst):     '''     Extracts the odd numbers from a given list of numbers.     ‘''     odd_numbers = [n for n in lst if n % 2 != 0 and n > 0]     return odd_numbersChild(Self-feedbacks, New code, Old code)To other children/mothersAgent stateAgent statedef is_sum_of_odds_ten(lst):     ‘’'Checks if sum of odd numbers is 10     ’’’     odd_numbers = get_odd_numbers(lst)     sum_odds = sum_numbers(odd_numbers)     return True if sum_odds == 10 else FalseFigure 4: Overview of the SoA framework. Mother agents and Child agents hierarchically construct a network and
perform function generation and modification. Mother agents delegate tasks to other Mother agents or Child agents,
and each agent independently executes tasks while effectively implementing a single function as a whole.

Method

AlphaCode
Incoder
Codex
Gemini Pro

GPT-3.5

SD SO Pass@1

17.1
15.2
47.0
67.7

(Li et al., 2022) ✘ ✘
(Fried et al., 2023) ✘ ✘
(Chen et al., 2021) ✘ ✘
(Anil et al., 2023) ✘ ✘
✘ ✘
CoT (Wei et al., 2022)
✘ ✘
ChatGPT
Self-Edit (Zhang et al., 2023) ✔ ✘
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) ✔ ✘
SoA (ours)

44.6
57.3
62.2
66.5
✔ ✔ 71.4

Table 1: Results of SoA and baselines on HumanEval.
The score of ChatGPT is taken from Dong et al. (2023).
SD indicates whether the agent uses self-debugging with
unit tests, while SO denotes whether the agent employs
self-organized multi-agent collaboration.

entire code, by independently implementing the
functions assigned to them.

4.2 Analysis

One of the most critical aspects of our study is
the efficiency of the self-organized multi-agent ap-
proach in large-scale code generation. To showcase
the superior performance of SoA, we conducted a
comprehensive comparative analysis between Re-
flexion, a state-of-the-art single-agent system, and
our proposed multi-agent system. Using the Hu-
manEval benchmark, we meticulously examined
the overall scale of the code generated by both
systems and the amount of code each agent inde-
pendently generated and memorized. To ensure a
fair comparison, we removed comments and doc-
strings from the HumanEval results and focused on
the number of characters and tokens of pure code.
Figure 5 presents a visualization of the average
amount of code generated by SoA and Reflexion
from the perspective of individual functions and

all functions. In the context of HumanEval, which
requires the implementation of a single function,
SoA’s code amount is calculated by summing the
code generated by each agent, while Reflexion’s
code amount is based on a single function. The
code amount per function in SoA refers to the code
generated by each individual agent, whereas in Re-
flexion, it is equivalent to the code amount of a
single function. The results unequivocally demon-
strate SoA’s superiority over Reflexion in terms of
the number of tokens per final code and the av-
erage number of characters per function. What
is remarkable is that despite each agent in SoA
handling significantly fewer tokens/characters com-
pared to the single agent in Reflexion, the overall
output generated by SoA is substantially greater.
This finding underscores the exceptional scalabil-
ity of SoA, indicating its ability to handle increas-
ingly complex tasks by seamlessly adding more
agents to the system. Our results suggest that by
increasing the depth of the agent hierarchy and in-
troducing more Mother agents, SoA can generate
even larger-scale code by efficiently distributing
the workload among multiple agents. As the tree
structure becomes deeper, the system exhibits an
infinite scaling potential, enabling the generation
of increasingly complex and extensive codebases
while ensuring that each agent handles a manage-
able portion of the code. Each agent can maintain
a manageable amount of code while theoretically
allowing for an indefinite increase in the overall
code generation capacity.

This distributed approach empowers SoA to sig-
nificantly scale up its ability to tackle large-scale
and complex coding tasks with remarkable effi-
ciency and high quality, far surpassing the limi-

Skeleton of CodeAgentdef function1(x)y = function2(x)z = function3(y)return function4(z)def function1(x)# Generate here“””   Docstrings “””1. GenerateLLMMemory2. MemorizeUnit test3. Self-debuggingassert function(1) == 2Unit testdef func2Unit testdef func3Unit testdef func4Unit testdef func5Unit testdef func5Unit testdef func5Unit testdef func5Unit testdef func5Unit testdef func5Unit test………………Docstringsdef function1(x)Multi-Agent Collaboration for Software De-
velopment
In recent years, several multi-agent-
based approaches have emerged as promising
solutions for software development, such as
MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023), ChatDev (Qian et al.,
2023), Self-collaboration (Dong et al., 2023), and
AgentCoder (Huang et al., 2023). These methods
typically personify agents and assign them specific
names or occupational roles, such as programmers,
project managers, or QA engineers, to allocate
tasks. While this approach has shown promise,
our method takes a different and more flexible ap-
proach. Instead of assigning fixed occupational
roles, we subdivide agent capabilities based on
code functionality, allowing each agent to demon-
strate its expertise without being constrained by pre-
defined roles. This fine-grained task allocation en-
ables more flexible problem-solving and adaptation
to the complexity of the software development pro-
cess. Moreover, by incorporating the concepts of
self-organization and self-proliferation, our agents
can dynamically scale up the overall code volume
based on the difficulty of the problem at hand, pro-
viding a highly adaptable and efficient framework
for large-scale code generation and modification.

Macro vs. Micro Perspectives While both multi-
agent-based methods (Hong et al., 2023; Qian et al.,
2023; Dong et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023) and our
proposed SoA framework share the common goal
of automating software development, they address
different technical aspects of the process. Existing
multi-agent methods primarily focus on optimiz-
ing the macro structure of software development,
such as project management and task allocation.
In contrast, our method takes a more micro-level
perspective, focusing on the elemental technolo-
gies of code generation and modification. These
approaches are not mutually exclusive but rather
complementary, offering a more comprehensive so-
lution to the challenges faced in automatic software
development. By combining the strengths of both
macro and micro-level approaches, we can create
a powerful and holistic framework that efficiently
handles the complexities of large-scale code gener-
ation and modification.

Engineering Tree-of-Thought
Prompt
(ToT)
(Yao et al., 2023a) and Skeleton of
Thought (SoT) (Ning et al., 2023) are prompt
engineering techniques
that utilize tree-like
structures. ToT represents reasoning steps as nodes
to explore correct reasoning paths, while SoT

Figure 5: Comparison of code generation amount be-
tween SoA (mulit-agent) and Reflexion (single agent).

tations encountered by single-agent systems like
Reflexion, where a sole agent is responsible for
managing and generating the entire codebase.

5 Related Work

LLM Agents Recent advancements in LLM
agents, such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), Re-
flexion (Shinn et al., 2023), Toolformer (Schick
et al., 2023), and Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023),
have primarily focused on single-agent approaches,
where one agent is responsible for both genera-
tion and modification tasks. Among these, Re-
flexion (Shinn et al., 2023) has gained significant
attention in the field of code generation due to its
outstanding performance. However, despite their
strengths, these single-agent approaches face in-
herent limitations when it comes to generating and
modifying large-scale codebases. To address these
limitations and push the boundaries of what is pos-
sible with LLM agents, we propose SoA, a novel
multi-agent framework that harnesses the power
of self-organization and collaboration. While we
intentionally adopted simple agents for SoA in
this work, our framework is flexible enough to in-
corporate more sophisticated and powerful meth-
ods (Zhong et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023) and
other state-of-the-art LLMs 5, further enhancing
its potential for large-scale code generation and
modification.

5https://claude.ai/

Average character count0204060FunctionSingle agent (Reflexion)Multi agents (SoA)                                      Average character count0255075100Entire codebaseSingle agent (Reflexion)Multi agents (SoA)                                      Avg. # Generated TokensAverage character count0100200300400Entire codebaseSingle agent (Reflexion)Multi agents (SoA)                                      Average character count050100150200FunctionSingle agent (Reflexion)Multi agents (SoA)                                      Avg. CharactersAvg. CharactersSingle agent (Reflexion)Multi agent (SoA)Avg. # Generated TokensPer a final code (all agents)Per a function  (agent)Per a final code (all agents)Per a function  (agent)generates a skeleton of the answer and completes
the contents in parallel to decrease generation
latency. In contrast, SoA uses a tree structure with
agents as nodes, focusing on their collaboration
and self-organization to generate and modify code
efficiently.

6 Conclusion

In this work, we introduced Self-organized Agents
(SoA), a novel multi-agent framework for efficient
and scalable automatic code generation and op-
timization using large language models (LLMs).
SoA addresses the limitations of single-agent ap-
proaches in handling large-scale, complex code-
bases by leveraging the power of self-organization
and distributed code generation.
In SoA, self-
organized agents operate independently to generate
and modify code components while seamlessly col-
laborating to construct the overall codebase. A key
feature of our framework is the automatic multi-
plication of agents based on problem complexity,
allowing for dynamic scalability and enabling the
overall code volume to be increased indefinitely ac-
cording to the number of agents, while the amount
of code managed by each agent remains constant.
We evaluated SoA on the HumanEval bench-
mark and demonstrated its superior performance
compared to Reflexion, a state-of-the-art single-
agent system, with SoA achieving a 5% improve-
ment in terms of Pass@1 accuracy. Furthermore,
our in-depth analysis revealed SoA’s remarkable
scalability, as each agent in SoA handles signifi-
cantly less code compared to the single-agent base-
line, yet the overall generated code is substantially
greater. These results highlight the effectiveness of
SoA in generating and optimizing large-scale code
efficiently and with high quality.

However, it is essential to acknowledge the limi-
tations of the current implementation of SoA. The
framework’s performance may be affected by the
choice of LLM and the quality of the generated
unit tests. Additionally, SoA has been evaluated
on a limited set of programming tasks, and its ef-
fectiveness in handling more complex, real-world
software development projects remains to be in-
vestigated. Furthermore, the communication and
collaboration mechanisms among agents in SoA
can be further optimized to improve efficiency and
fault tolerance.

Despite these limitations, we believe that the
SoA framework has significant potential for future

research and development in the field of automatic
software development.

References

Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-
Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan
Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Mil-
lican, David Silver, Slav Petrov, Melvin Johnson,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia
Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Timothy P. Lilli-
crap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy,
Michael Isard, Paul Ronald Barham, Tom Henni-
gan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds,
Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan Doherty, Eli Collins, Clemens
Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem
Ayoub, Megha Goel, George Tucker, Enrique Pi-
queras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov,
Ivo Danihelka, Becca Roelofs, Anaïs White, Anders
Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati,
Mehran Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman,
Jakub Sygnowski, and et al. 2023. Gemini: A fam-
ily of highly capable multimodal models. CoRR,
abs/2312.11805.

W Ross Ashby. 1947. Principles of the self-organizing
dynamic system. The Journal of general psychology,
37(2):125–128.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020, virtual.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan,
Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan,
Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen
Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sas-
try, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray,
Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz
Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cum-
mings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Eliza-
beth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen
Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie
Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles
Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder,
Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya

Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluat-
ing large language models trained on code. CoRR,
abs/2107.03374.

Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-
collaboration code generation via chatgpt. CoRR,
abs/2304.07590.

Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang,
Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Scott Yih,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Incoder:
A generative model for code infilling and synthesis.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda,
May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng
Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran,
Lingfeng Xiao, and Chenglin Wu. 2023. Metagpt:
Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative
framework. CoRR, abs/2308.00352.

Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck,
and Heming Cui. 2023. Agentcoder: Multi-agent-
based code generation with iterative testing and opti-
misation. CoRR, abs/2312.13010.

Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Mas-
son d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-
Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey
Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz,
Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando
de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals.
2022. Competition-level code generation with alpha-
code. CoRR, abs/2203.07814.

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder,
Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-
bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Itera-
tive refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA,
December 10 - 16, 2023.

Niklas Muennighoff, Qian Liu, Armel Zebaze, Qinkai
Zheng, Binyuan Hui, Terry Yue Zhuo, Swayam
Singh, Xiangru Tang, Leandro von Werra, and
Shayne Longpre. 2023. Octopack: Instruction tuning
code large language models. CoRR, abs/2308.07124.

Mosh Levy, Alon Jacoby, and Yoav Goldberg. 2024.
Same task, more tokens: the impact of input length on
the reasoning performance of large language models.
CoRR, abs/2402.14848.

Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Zixuan Zhou, Huazhong Yang,
and Yu Wang. 2023. Skeleton-of-thought: Large
language models can do parallel decoding. CoRR,
abs/2307.15337.

Jiaqi Li, Mengmeng Wang, Zilong Zheng, and Muhan
Loogle: Can long-context lan-
Zhang. 2023a.
guage models understand long contexts? CoRR,
abs/2311.04939.

Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas
Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny
Chim, Qian Liu, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Terry Yue
Zhuo, Thomas Wang, Olivier Dehaene, Mishig
Davaadorj, Joel Lamy-Poirier, João Monteiro, Oleh
Shliazhko, Nicolas Gontier, Nicholas Meade, Armel
Zebaze, Ming-Ho Yee, Logesh Kumar Umapathi,
Jian Zhu, Benjamin Lipkin, Muhtasham Oblokulov,
Zhiruo Wang, Rudra Murthy V, Jason Stillerman,
Siva Sankalp Patel, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Marco
Zocca, Manan Dey, Zhihan Zhang, Nour Moustafa-
Fahmy, Urvashi Bhattacharyya, Wenhao Yu, Swayam
Singh, Sasha Luccioni, Paulo Villegas, Maxim Ku-
nakov, Fedor Zhdanov, Manuel Romero, Tony Lee,
Nadav Timor, Jennifer Ding, Claire Schlesinger, Hai-
ley Schoelkopf, Jan Ebert, Tri Dao, Mayank Mishra,
Alex Gu, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane Ander-
son, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, Danish Contractor, Siva
Reddy, Daniel Fried, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Yacine Jer-
nite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Sean Hughes, Thomas
Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm
de Vries. 2023b. Starcoder: may the source be with
you! CoRR, abs/2305.06161.

Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kush-
man, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Ec-
cles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal

OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report.

CoRR,

abs/2303.08774.

Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen,
Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
Sun. 2023. Communicative agents for software de-
velopment. CoRR, abs/2307.07924.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023,
New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023.

Uri Shaham, Maor Ivgi, Avia Efrat, Jonathan Berant,
and Omer Levy. 2023. Zeroscrolls: A zero-shot
In Find-
benchmark for long text understanding.
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023,
pages 7977–7989. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-
flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023,
New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023.

A Pseudocode

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton-
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA,
USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
2023a. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving
with large language models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023,
NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10
- 16, 2023.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.

Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023.
Self-edit: Fault-aware code editor for code genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada,
July 9-14, 2023, pages 769–787. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Lily Zhong, Zilong Wang, and Jingbo Shang. 2024.
LDB: A large language model debugger via ver-
CoRR,
ifying runtime execution step-by-step.
abs/2402.16906.

Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman,
Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2023. Language
agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and plan-
ning in language models. CoRR, abs/2310.04406.

Algorithm 1 Generate Code with Self-organized Agent Framework
Input: docstrings: Docstrings for the function, unit_tests: List of unit tests, max_depth: Maximum depth of the agent

hierarchy, max_iterations: Maximum number of code modification iterations

else

else

end for

if depth = 1 then

next_agent ← new ChildAgent

if depth − 1 = max_depth then

else if depth = max_depth then

next_agent ← new MotherAgent

GENERATEAGENT(agent, depth, subtask_docstrings, subtask_unit_tests)

Generate code for agent.subtask_docstrings and agent.subtask_unit_tests
agent.code ← generated code

end if
Assign subtask_docstrings and unit_tests to next_agent
GENERATE(next_agent, depth + 1)

skeleton ← Generate skeleton from agent.docstrings and agent.unittests
agent.code ← skeleton
for each subtask_docstrings, subtask_unit_tests in subtasks do

Output: The final generated code
1:
2: Initialize the root Mother agent with docstrings and unit_tests
3:
4: function GENERATEAGENT(agent, depth, subtask_docstrings, subtask_unit_tests)
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12: end function
13:
14: function GENERATE(agent, depth)
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31: end function
32:
33: function MODIFY(agent, test_result, upper_agent_observation)
34:
35:
36:
37:
38:
39:
40: end function
41:
42: Start code generation with GENERATE(root_mother, 1)
43:
44: for each iteration in max_iterations do
45:
46:
47:
48: end for
49:
50: return The final implementation combined from all agents

Generate feedback for agent based on test_result and upper_agent_observation
Update agent’s code based on feedback
for each subagent in agent.subagents do

Generate code for agent.subtask_docstrings and agent.subtask_unit_tests
agent.code ← generated code
for each subtask_docstrings, subtask_unit_tests in subtasks do

Evaluate subagent.code using subagent.unit_tests to get subagent_test_result
MODIFY(subagent, subagent_test_result, feedback and code changes)

GENERATEAGENT(agent, depth, subtask_docstrings, subtask_unit_tests)

end for

end for

end if

Combine implementations from all agents to create f inal_implementation
Evaluate f inal_implementation using unit_tests to get test_result
Modify the code starting from root_mother with MODIFY(root_mother, test_result, None)

▷ Root Mother

▷ Child

▷ Mother

