Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse
Human Personalities
Jiayang Li∗
2233666@tongji.edu.cn
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Jiale Li∗
2233676@tongji.edu.com
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Jiahao Chen
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Yifan Li
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Shijie Wang
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Hugo Zhou
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Minjun Ye
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

Yunsheng Su†
Tongji University
Shanghai, China

4
2
0
2

r
p
A
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
7
2
0
.
4
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Evolving Agents could exhibit differentiated behaviors corresponding to their personalities and undergo continuous
personality evolution based on external information during the interactive simulation system

∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

ABSTRACT
Human-like Agents with diverse and dynamic personality could
serve as an important design probe in the process of user-centered

xxx,
,
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx,
,

design, thereby enabling designers to enhance the user experience
of interactive application.

In this article, we introduce Evolving Agents, a novel agent archi-
tecture that consists of two systems: Personality and Behavior. The
Personality system includes three modules: Cognition, Emotion
and Character Growth. The Behavior system comprises two mod-
ules: Planning and Action. We also build a simulation platform that
enables agents to interact with the environment and other agents.
Evolving Agents can simulate the human personality evolution
process. Compared to its initial state, agents’ personality and behav-
ior patterns undergo believable development after several days of
simulation. Agents reflect on their behavior to reason and develop
new personality traits. These traits, in turn, generate new behavior
patterns, forming a feedback loop-like personality evolution.

In our experiment, we utilized simulation platform with 10 agents
for evaluation. During the evaluation, these agents experienced be-
lievable and inspirational personality evolution. Through ablation
and control experiments, we demonstrated the outstanding effec-
tiveness of agent personality evolution and all modules of our agent
architecture contribute to creating believable human-like agents
with diverse and dynamic personalities. We also demonstrated
through workshops how Evolving Agents could inspire designers.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and
tools; • Computing methodologies → Natural language pro-
cessing.

KEYWORDS
Human-AI interaction, Human-Like agents, generative AI, large
language models, cognitive psychology, personality psychology

ACM Reference Format:
Jiale Li, Jiayang Li, Jiahao Chen, Yifan Li, Shijie Wang, Hugo Zhou, Minjun
Ye, and Yunsheng Su. 2024. Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of
Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities. In Proceedings of xxx. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1 INTRODUCTION
Embodied agents are capable of simulating the humans behaviors
[1]. By observing and interacting with these human-like agents, we
can gain a better understanding of ourselves as humans. Within
a design context, analyzing how these agents operate in specific
scenarios allows designers to uncover insights into potential user
behaviors, needs, and experiences, making the embodied agents an
inspirational design probe in the user-centered design process.

Numerous studies have already proposed embodied agents’ ca-
pable of simulating human-like behaviors within virtual environ-
ments. Agents can actively interact with objects and other agents
in the simulation environment[2][3][4] or continuously learn new
behaviors guided by predefined tasks in the environment[5][6].

One of the foremost objectives in the development of embodied
agents is to enhance their behavior’s similarity to human actions
within the simulation environment[7][8][9][10]. Real humans ex-
hibit a wide array of personality traits and corresponding behavior
patterns[11] that dynamically evolve through interacting with the
external world[12]. However, current embodied agents show a

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

constrained range of personality expressions and, notably, their
behaviors and personalities do not undergo evolution over time
via continuous interaction with the simulation environments. In
previous sandbox simulation studies, there are seldom instances of
the personality evolution process occurring without task-oriented
guidance.Agents that do not undergo continuous evolution seem
to experience each day as one long moment, repeating itself over
and over.

Furthering this point, we find that current agents rarely exhibit
diversified and dynamic personalities within the interactive sim-
ulation process. This results in a lack of variation in behavioral
patterns both among different agents and across different simula-
tion periods of the same agent. Therefore, we aim to design a novel
agent architecture that enables agents to possess their own diversi-
fied and dynamic personalities, that could make agents experience
their days as thousands of single and different moments, which is
called personality evolution in previous work.[13]

To realize agents personality evolution, enabling agents to ex-
hibit differentiated behaviors corresponding to their various per-
sonalities and undergo continuous personality evolution based on
external information, during the interactive simulation system, we
drew inspiration from psychological theories and proposed a novel
architecture - Evolving Agents. Through simulation and experi-
mental analysis in the sandbox environments, Evolving Agents are
capable of simulating believable personality traits and personalized
behavioral patterns. Moreover, their personalities and behaviors
undergo continuous evolution throughout the simulation process.
Evolving Agents exhibit differentiated behavioral patterns based
on their diverse personality, while their behavioral experiences
also influence the changes in agent personalities at the same time,
forming a feedback loop-like process of behavior-personality de-
velopment. For example, Benjamin, committed to changing his
Introverted personality, so he makes efforts to engage in more inter-
personal communication. His enjoyable social experiences further
enhance Benjamin’s extroversion, ultimately leading to a more
open-minded attitude towards interpersonal interactions. Similarly,
Isabella actively explores her personal values during the process,
and the encouragement she receives from others reinforces her
determination to live for herself, consequently enhancing Isabella’s
self-awareness.

The architectural design of Evolving Agents incorporates in-
sights from both psychology and computer science. By adopting
the stimulus-response concept from behavioral psychology, we
have developed two main systems: the Behavior System, which
is responsible for planning specific behaviors and execution. The
Personality system, constructed with Emotion, Cognition, and Char-
acter Growth modules, cognitively processes external information
to enable continuous evolution. The interaction between these two
systems allows agents to exhibit human-like personalized behavior
patterns and undergo dynamic personality evolution. Additionally,
we have developed a new sandbox environment where agents can
interact with environmental scenarios and other agents. This plat-
form allows users to edit environments and interact with agents,
providing intuitive and engaging simulations.

To validate the perception and believability of Evolving Agents
simulating human diverse personality traits and dynamic personal-
ity evolution, we proposed several research hypotheses:

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

• Evolving Agents can construct agents with perceptible and

believable differentiated personality traits.

• Evolving Agents’ personality descriptions undergo percepti-
ble and believable evolution during interactive simulations.
• Evolving Agents’ dynamic personality evolution can induce

perceptible and believable changes in their behavior.

We conducted both objective data analysis and subjective human
evaluation, with both sets of results preliminarily confirming our
research hypotheses. In the objective data analysis, we utilized the
Big Five personality traits scale and behavioral similarity analysis to
verify whether Evolving Agents have undergone differentiated and
dynamic personality evolution, and whether the behavior pattern
develops continuously. In human evaluation, we engaged 30 human
assessors to evaluate the believability of personality differences
and the personality evolution in Evolving Agents. They were also
asked to compare several ablations that restrict the agents’ access to
Character Growth module and complete Character Structure. These
demonstrates that Evolving Agents can perceptibly and believably
exhibit differentiated behaviors in alignment with their person-
alities, as well as undergo continuous and believable personality
evolution, and each of these components is critical to strong perfor-
mance.Furthermore, we organized designer workshops around this
system to discuss the inspiring effect of Evolving Agents as design
probes for designers, yielding valuable insights into integrating
such systems into user-oriented design processes.

In sum, this paper makes the following contributions:

• Evolving Agents, perceptible and believable simulacra of
diverse and dynamic human personalities in the interactive
simulation system.

• A novel agent architecture, having behavior and personality
two main systems, makes it possible to execute planning, ac-
tion, emotion, cognition and character growth in the Virtual
Simulation Environment, enabling agents to exhibit differen-
tiated behaviors corresponding to their various personalities
and undergo continuous personality evolution based on ex-
ternal information during the interactive simulation.

• An evaluation procedure was established that includes two
methods: objective data verification and human evaluation,
for assessing the effectiveness of agent personality evolution
and the contributions of each module within the architecture
during this process. Additionally, a supportive workshop was
conducted to discuss the inspirational effects of Evolving
Agents on designers.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Interaction Between Humans And Agents
As generative models advance rapidly in general capabilities and
intent recognition[11][14][15], agents powered by these models
have found widespread application across various fields and task
types[16][17][18], demonstrating a broad spectrum of application
prospects. With the enrichment of application scenarios for agents,
novel patterns of interaction between humans and agents are con-
tinually emerging.

Human-agent interaction, as the name suggests, involves agents
collaborating with humans to accomplish tasks[16]. Such as intro-
ducing agents to assist in peer psychological counseling[19], using

xxx,
,

agents in telemarketing scenarios[20], or co-creating literature or
artworks with agents[20][21][22].

In recent years, the human-like behavior exhibited by embodied
agents in simulation environments has attracted widespread so-
cial attention[23][19][24][25]. Among these, the Generative Agent
discussed human social and communication behaviors within so-
cieties. By observing simulated behaviors of agents in a sandbox
environment[2], we can know ourselves as humans better.

Some research focuses on multi-agent simulation in more goal-
oriented settings, such as collaborative efforts in software produc-
tion within software studios[26]. While some others focused on
creating agents capable of autonomous exploration and continu-
ous learning within game worlds[5]. Additionally, there are studies
aimed at developing human-like NPCs, enabling text-based strategy
game interactions with users, provide imaginative possibilities for
future interaction possibilities between game players and NPCs or
companions.

When focusing on the interaction between designers and agents,
designers can observe the simulated behaviors and feedback of
agents representing target users, gaining valuable design analysis
materials to assist in the user-oriented design process[20][27]. Cur-
rent research has explored this direction; for example, one study
aimed to simulate doctor-patient communication scenarios in psy-
chological counseling to provide references and suggestions for real
treatment[8]. Another study simulated user behaviors in scenarios
like online movie ratings, offering insights for further exploration
in these areas[28].

2.2 Human-like Agents In Virtual Simulation

Environment

Simulation of human behavior in real-world like environment has
been an interesting and important area for a long time[29].Ushered
in by the landmark paper on Generative Agents[29], the promise of
modelling conceivable human-like behavior in Virtual Simulation
Environment has sparked the imagination of many[30].

The human-like dimension of embodied agents can be subdi-
vided into intrinsic and extrinsic aspects[31][16], as informed by
sociological opinions. The extrinsic aspect encompasses behaviors
at both the individual and group levels, whereas the intrinsic aspect
comprises emotions, characteristics, and cognition. These delin-
eated dimensions afford researchers numerous opportunities to
enhance the human-likeness of agents[32][8][33][4][29].

Current research on human-like agents in simulation environ-
ments predominantly focuses on their extrinsic aspects. At the
level of individual behavior, Danny Driess[34][9][35] proposed a
multi-modal task-executing agent designed for real-world scenarios.
Projects such as MINEDOJO and Voyager, leveraging the expansive
game world of Minecraft, explore the individual learning behaviors
of agents within such virtual settings[4][36][6].

Regarding group-level behaviors, Generative Agents have been
developed to enable agents to perform social actions. Addition-
ally, AgentSim offers a comprehensive architecture for simulating
standardized agent behaviors, incorporating a module for tool use
among agents.

Nowadays, Researchers are gradually realizing the practical com-
putational significance of an Agent’s personality on human-like

xxx,
,

behaviors[12][37][23][38]. In the study of Humanoid Agents[3],
researchers explored how emotions and needs influence an Agent’s
planning, largely addressing the overly rational and stable machine-
like state exhibited by former Agents. However, research on embod-
ied agents in virtual environments seldom discuss other intrinsic
dimensions. Expanding the scope to other Agent application sce-
narios, such as conversational interaction Chatbots[39], we can still
find some works focusing on the intrinsic aspects of Agents, such as
employing psychological theories, especially cognitive psychology,
to test and enhance the cognitive abilities of personality agents[40],
and some works focusing on modeling emotions, especially emo-
tional recognition and empathy[40]. In terms of character, some
works simulate the static personality and knowledge of histori-
cal figures based on external data[32], and others create chatbots
with different static personalities based on personality psychology
theories[39].

It should be noted that the intrinsic personality of real humans is
not immutable. In the field of psychology, researchers believe that
personality is continuously influenced and changed by external
factors[1]. In existing discussions on research involving embod-
ied agents, we rarely find studies that detail the process of such
human-like intrinsic personality evolution or studies on how in-
trinsic personality evolution affects an agent’s extrinsic behavior.

2.3 Personality Evolution Architecture
The term "personality" refers to the sets of predictable behaviors
by which individuals are recognized and identified[12]. Person-
ality analysis and description are widely studied in the field of
personality psychology, a field that proposes well-known personal-
ity classification methods such as the Big Five personality traits[41]
and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)[42].

Regarding the mechanisms of personality affect behavior, the
widely accepted definition of personality refers to cognitive, emo-
tional and character traits that shape behaviors[11]. In previous
work, researchers believe that personality changes are related to
cognitive complexity[12]. Another study have proposed cognitive
conceptual frameworks including reasoning, retrieval, learning and
grounding[43]. Further research has summarized the conceptual
architecture of agents in more human-like terms of perception,
brain, action[16]. In research related to agents, Some agents can
adjust emotional responses and engage in emotional resonance[24].
Additionally, some work has explored character portrayal based
on large language models[44]. However, current architectural ap-
proaches to agent personality are mostly partial simulations, not
yet producing simulations of an integrated personality that can
influence behavior.

What’s more, in real word human behavior and personality are al-
ways evolving over time, which presents a substantial challenge for
agent simulation. A realistic approach to representing this changing
process is dynamic personality, which considers the variability of
personality traits on the basis of changes at the corresponding per-
sonality levels. In early research, some works used discontinuous
personality update models to achieve the purpose of personality evo-
lution, and some works dynamically simulated personality through
the establishment of fuzzy logic agents. These works, trained on
traditional models and primarily utilizing a parametric approach to

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

control personality traits, are often constrained by the number of
parameters. This limitation results in a lack of realism in the process
of agent personality changes. At the same time, different parame-
ter change processes are often directly inferred by the AI model,
lacking an interpretive description of the intermediate process, and
observers cannot intuitively understand the reasons for character
personality changes. As for current work discussing generative
model-based agents, they only simulate static personality at a spe-
cific time point and have not yet simulated dynamic personality
agents that evolve over time.

3 AGENT ARCHITECTURE
To enable agents evolution, we first need to understand how human
personalities are composed and evolve. The field of psychology al-
ready has many rich studies related to this issue[30]. Inspired by the
stimulus-response theory in behaviorist psychology[45], we wish
for agents to gain stimulation and feedback through interaction
with simulation environments, thereby affecting the development
of the agent’s personality.

Based on the psychology theory discussed[11], we propose a
novel agent architecture - Evolving Agents, which encompasses
two subsystems: Behavior and Personality, as shown in figure 2. The
Behavior system guides the execution of observable, personalized
actions. The Personality system establishes a cognitive mechanism
with individual characteristics, capable of continuously updating
personality based on feedback based on the external information.
During simulation, the Behavior and Personality systems continu-
ously influence each other. The planning and behavior of the Agent
will take its own characteristic into comprehensive consideration.
Simultaneously, the experiences generated from an agent’s daily
actions also impact personality through memory and insight. This
process of mutual influence forms a feedback loop pattern, facili-
tating continuous personality evolution.

In detail, the Behavior system comprises two main modules:
Plan and Action. Its execution includes personalized planning for
the Agent, social engagements and responses, and behavior execu-
tion functionalities. The Personality system contains three main
modules: Emotion, Cognition and Character Growth. Its execution
involves subjective emotional perception, daily information filter-
ing and memory decay management, comprehensive context-aware
idea summarization, and the growing of the Agent’s character. Each
module is empowered by large language models like GPT-4 when
dealing with its input.

3.1 Agent Behavior
The Behavior system is responsible for executing planned actions[30]
within a simulated environment. Building on the existed archi-
tecture of Agent simulation[44][46][43], which includes planning
(Plan)[47] and executing plans (Action), we introduce three innova-
tive elements in the Plan Module: Characteristic Plan, Goal-based
Mechanism, and Specific Post-Process. In the Action Module, we
propose a new method to describe the Agent’s social relationships
and enhance the continuity of conversations between Agents.

3.1.1 Plan Module. Characteristic Plan: We aim to reflect the per-
sonality differences of agents in the behaviors of Evolving Agents.
Therefore, in the design of the planning module, we consider not

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

xxx,
,

Figure 2: Evolving Agents architecture is inspired from psychology stimulus-response theory, encompasses two subsystems:
Behavior and Personality

only environmental information as inputs but also integrate agents’
character and memory as references for GPT-4 to generate plans.
This ensures that each agent can create a schedule that is align with
its personality. The specific mechanism by which the Personality
system affects the Plan module will be discussed in the following
section3.2.

Goal-based Mechanism: We aim to construct a mechanism that
can easily analyze the variations between agent behavior and per-
sonality. Therefore, we referenced relevant perspectives on behavior
and motivation from self-determination theory[48], considering
planning as an expression of behavioral motivation. In our specific
design, we defined categories of goals (such as learning, relaxation,
exercise, etc.) and required agents to understand and refer to these
goals while planning as shown in figure 3. This is to ensure that
agents consider the motivations behind each planned behavior, guid-
ing their thought process effectively. Such a goal-based mechanism
also aids observers in summarizing user behavior patterns, making
it easier to analyze related pattern evolutions. We will discuss this
in detail in Chapter 5.

Specific Post-Process:We provide different planning goals with
unique post-processes. Taking "Appointment" as an example, most
existing Agent simulation systems use distance-based and probability-
based triggering logic for Agent interactions, as is shown in figure
4. We aim to enhance the proactivity of Agents in interacting with
others, fostering more "conscious" and "prepared" social activities

Figure 3: Each agent can create a schedule that aligns with its
character. For example, the enthusiastic and open Isabella
prefers to leave her own dorm and make social plans com-
pared to the shy Benjamin

in the simulated world. In the planning phase, Agents can consider
their relationships with other Agents and their current state to

xxx,
,

decide whether to extend social invitations. The invited Agents re-
spond to the invitation, giving reasons for acceptance or rejection.
For overlapping appointments, Agents weigh existing social plans
against new ones, prioritizing based on personal development ben-
efits. Following this request-response process, both parties adjust
their plans based on the outcome.

For example, Sophia wants to meet Isabella at a cafe at 16:00
to discuss, believing that Isabella’s appreciation for creative ex-
pression aligns with her own dream of becoming an inspiring and
successful writer. Subsequently, Isabella accepts Sophia’s invitation,
reasoning that her own preference for in-depth conversations over
superficial socializing perfectly complements Sophia’s personality,
suggesting that their meeting could lead to deeper and more mean-
ingful discussions. Interestingly, when faced with simultaneous
social invitations, even though Isabella initially planned to engage
with another friend, Benjamin, during this time, she considers the
conversation with Sophia potentially more crucial for her personal
development, and thus decides to accept this invitation.Please refer
to the image for the detailed process.

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

the dialogue memory. Whenever a conversation occurs, the Agents
will review the summary of content previously discussed with the
current interlocutor. Then, it determines a "further" new topic based
on the previously discussed topics, and discuss around this new
topic. This dialogue mechanism enhances the inspiration and view-
point generation. For example, Isabella and Sophia’s discussions
deepened from personal development and societal needs to spe-
cific methods for maintaining creativity and mental health under
social pressure, the procedure of which is shown in figure 5. This
mechanism mirrors real-world communication, where familiarity
and discussion depth lead to increasingly inspiring and detailed
insights on certain topics. Abstract Agent Relationship: Evolving

Figure 4: post process procedure of appointment plan

3.1.2 Action Module. Action Mechanism: When the game time
reaches the scheduled plan time, the Agent starts executing the
specific plan. By considering the current plan and personality in-
formation, GPT-4-turbo generates a detailed, objective natural lan-
guage description of the Agent’s actions regarding the plan. Before
executing the plan, the Agent must first check if the environmental
conditions meet the plan’s objectives, adopting the item interaction
condition logic from Generative Agents. If the target interaction
object is occupied, the Agent will replan until conditions are met.
Once the environmental object target for executing the plan is
secured, the Agent will take over the interaction spot (in social
scenarios, reserving adjacent spots for its social peers) and perform
the action.

Continously Developing Communication: When two Agents
come within a certain distance of each other, there’s a probability
of triggering a dialogue, depending on their social tendencies and
current state (for example, if an Agent’s plan is social, it will actively
initiate a conversation). From a social psychology perspective, such
interactions allow Agents to gain insights from others with differ-
ent personalities, serving as a vital external stimulus for their own
personality development. We aim for the depth of conversation
between agents to gradually increase, enabling the agents to gener-
ate more valuable insights. To achieve this, we have implemented

Figure 5: Agent choose their communication partner and
define the topic to talk based on the dialog memory

Agents does not use parameters or specific categories to describe
agents’ relationship with others. We found that doing so would ex-
cessively predetermine interactions with certain Agents. We enable
large language models to select preferred conversation partners
based on agents’ dialogue memory. Simultaneously, we requires
agents to provide reasons for their choices. This approach results
in more rational and intriguing social choices, enabling agents to
openly choose conversation partners and gain diverse perspectives
on their dilemmas. For instance, Isabella, who is balancing external
expectations with personal aspirations might focus on issues like
personal dreams and social responsibility with Sophia, a literary
writer interested in social insights, or focus on balancing personal
pursuits and intimate relationships with Isla, a romantic filmmaker,
as is shown in figure 6. We believe this process can help agents
explore more possibilities during their Personality Evolution.

3.2 Agent Personality
In the Agent Behavior System described above, Agents produce
a variety of objective behaviors through interactions with their

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

xxx,
,

Figure 6: The agent discusses different topics with various
partners, and the depth of each topic continuously increases

environment and other Agents. From the perspective of cognitive
psychology, these behaviors can be viewed as stimuli. The Agent
Personality system is responsible for processing these stimuli, gen-
erating feedback, and thus driving the evolution of the Agent’s
personality. In the field of psychology, the widely accepted defini-
tion of personality encompasses cognitive, emotional and character
traits that influence behaviors. We adapt these elements from psy-
chology theory to fit the operational logic of Agent Architecture,
ultimately identifying three main modules within the personality
system: Emotion, Cognition and Character Growth.

3.2.1 Character Structure. Five Dimension Based Character Struc-
ture: In psychology, character is defined as a set of information that
includes habits and tendencies in thought and action[49], which
play a crucial role in their behavior. From the perspective of system
design, character directly describes an individual’s traits and state.
A structure that can precisely and comprehensively describe
characteristics is essential for the effective integration and trans-
mission of personality information to each module within an agent
architecture. We constructed a five-dimension Character Struc-
ture based on psychological theories, including Basic Information,
Current State, Traits[41][50], Conflict[51], and Preference[16],as is
shown in figure 7. "Basic Information" encompasses fundamental
information about the Agent that does not change, such as gender,
age, profession, etc. In the Current State, we detail the agent’s initial
life and psychological state. In Personality Traits, we describe the
agent based on the Big Five personality dimensions. In conflict,
we detail contradictions within the agent’s personality, facilitating
personality evolution around these conflicts. To better describe
agent’s behavior characteristics, in Behavior Preference we set a
six-dimension criteria which is composed of the ultimate goal, long-
term goal(derived by ultimate goal), short-term goal(derived by
ultimate goal), daily routine(based on agent’s overall personality),
hobbies and venue preference. In practice, we initialize specific
agents’ personality using GPT-4-turbo based on this Five Dimen-
sion Character structure.

Two Versions of Character Structure: To enhance the efficiency
and accuracy of the system development process, we employ two
versions of the Character Structure within the system: a full version

Figure 7: Five Dimension Based Character Structure

and a summary version. The full version includes complete descrip-
tion, while the summary version condenses and summarizes the
full version. In specific modules, we differentiate between utilizing
the full version and the summary version based on the variance
in information weight. For instance, in the Behavior system’s Plan
module discussed earlier, we emphasize the information weight of
Behavior Preference from the Character Structure. Therefore, we
provide a full description of Behavior Preference to GPT-4-turbo,
but only the summary versions for other dimensions. As for other
dimensions, we only provide the summary version. This approach
helps the model focus more on the alignment between Plan and
Behavior Preference, also effectively reducing the generation time
for large language models meanwhile.

3.2.2 Emotion. Timely Experience and Feeling: Human feelings
towards the same objective behavior are not constant. Specific
subjective experiences and emotional responses are generated in
response to external stimuli under particular circumstances. In
specific circumstances, outworld’s stimuli affects us to generate
emotional behavior and subjective feelings. As a result, our cog-
nitive process such as attention, thinking pattern and decision
is influenced, leading us to differentiated perceptions of external
information[52]. Therefore, it’s crucial to build a system that can
not only comprehensively consider the current state and perform
emotional perception on ongoing behaviors, but also ensure that
later cognition process receive information aligned with the char-
acter’s current emotional state. At the implementation level, we
categorize the Agent’s current emotional state into seven categories.
The Emotion module considers the current personality conflicts
and other personality information to update emotion based on the
behavior being executed. In detail, we request GPT4 to choose the
current emotion class with a first-person perspective description of

xxx,
,

inner feeling. This module allows Agents to generate subjective de-
scriptions that vary and align with their experiences, such as Sophia
feeling excited about writing her personal novel due to anticipation
of creating her literary work, or feeling anxious and self-doubtful
after hearing the technological innovation in the writing process
told by Benjamin, as is shown in Figure 8.

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

Figure 8: Agents generate subjective descriptions that vary
and align with their experiences

Emotion-Based Plan Evaluation: Previous research has noted that
humans don’t rigidly follow the plans they set for themselves. In
the design of Humanoid Agent architecture, researchers proposed
a dual-system structure of emotion and behavior to allow Agents
to constantly adapt their plans based on internal feelings.

The Evolving Agents’ Emotion module also supports continuous
evaluation and adjustment in the Behavior system’s Plan module.
We simplified the adjustment mechanism of Emotion on Plan, using
a more systematic decision-making mechanism to trigger plan
adjustments. Emotions are categorized on a scale from negative
to positive, mapped within a 0-7 interval. Significant emotional
shifts during an action (e.g., from excitement to calm, crossing a
3-interval span) indicate substantial emotional fluctuations, as a
result of which, agents should reevaluate the forthcoming plans.
This straightforward strategy, as is shown in Figure 9, demonstrates
believable and dynamic planning capabilities. For example, after a
conversation with Sophia, Isabella’s mood shifted from excitement
to fear (due to the discussion regarding social responsibilities caused
pressure), leading her to adjust her original plan and go to a square
for relaxation to calm her emotions.

3.2.3 Cognition. Emotion perceives external objective events pro-
duced by the Behavior system, generating subjective emotions for
each behavior. However, this perception is immediate and frag-
mented. Real humans are not directly shaped by every single occur-
rence and emotion; instead, through unique cognitive processes, in-
formation is filtered and holistically evaluated and summarized. in-
stead,humans will filter and evaluate information we received.Such
process is Interestingly, psychologists also apply computational

Figure 9: Agent evaluate and modify existed plans based on
the emotional fluctuations

thinking to understand how humans absorb, comprehend infor-
mation, and shape their personalities, viewing the human brain as
an information processing system that identifies, stores, and ulti-
mately reorganizes and reconstructs its system[38]. Based on this
concept, we developed the Memory and Insight processes within
the Cognition module.

Memory - Characteristic Information Filter: Memory serves as
a universal module in current Agent design, with the Generative
Agent architecture introducing the Memory-stream architecture
for storing, encoding, and retrieving relevant experiences. Cogni-
tive psychology suggests that people with different personalities
tend to notice and acquire information about the objective world
differently[13], indicating the need for a Memory system tailored to
individual traits. Therefore, the Evolving Agents places greater em-
phasis on differentiated information weight assessment. It includes
two types of memory data structures: short-term and long-term
memory. Short-term memory stores all executed actions along with
their corresponding emotions as temporary data. Long-term mem-
ory, on the other hand, archives information that has been filtered
and summarized from short-term memory. The Agent selects from
its existing short-term memory based on the personality features
within its Character Structure. It subjectively describes multiple sets
of behaviors and emotions, storing the outcomes in its long-term
memory database. In practice, Agents indeed develop long-term
memories that align with personal traits, especially personality
contradictions. For example, Benjamin, who is contemplating in-
terdisciplinary development, pays attention to information outside
his field of study, such as reading a literature book in the library. Is-
abella, grappling with personal versus societal conflicts, takes great
interest in the social philosophy discussions provided by Sophia.
Cognitive psychology’s memory processing theory[53] suggests
that even long-term memories fade over time, understood as the

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

gradual blurring of information. The design of long-term memory
also incorporates this fading mechanism by setting a capacity limit
for the memory pool. Upon reaching this threshold, the Agent
abstracts and condenses the earliest memories to blur them which
is shown in Figure 10.

xxx,
,

Figure 11: Insight enables agents to engage in personalized
reflection on daily events.

comprehensive descriptions updated within the agent’s Character
Structure. This structure doesn’t involve complex algorithmic logic
but demands high precision in prompt engineering to accurately
depict personality changes. We designed the Character Growth pro-
cess in a chain-like pattern after extensive testing and consideration
of the interrelations within the Character Structure, dividing it into
four sequential sub-processes based on the Character Structure
dimensions, excluding Basic Information: State Modify, Feature
Modify, Contradiction Modify and Preference Modify. In the design
of specific prompts, we maintain Character Structure dimensions,
continuously summarizing new personality information based on
the current state of the agent and filling it into the corresponding
dimensions. In the continuous assessment of subsequent develop-
ment, this growth mechanism has provided us with traceable and
observable descriptions of personality changes.

For example, compared to Day 1’s Benjamin, who was immersed
in technology, his character now includes the realization that life
encompasses more than work or academics, emphasizing health
and happiness maintenance. This change was influenced by Zoe’s
encouragement for a healthy lifestyle during their conversation, as
is shown in Figure 12, highlighting Benjamin’s personality trans-
formation. Similarly, Isabella’s interactions with Sophia and her
solitary reflections in the square prompt her to shift from a person-
ality of conformity to one that is more free and authentic.

4 SIMULATION PLATFORM
Like the sandbox simulation environment proposed in the former
work, we create a Sandbox using the Unity engine as shown in
Figure 12. In this sandbox Agents will move and exhibit their actions
based on the computational results of Evolving Agents architecture,
making it easier for observers to interact.

4.1 Building System
4.1.1 Three Level Based Environment. Describing information con-
tained in the environment to the large language model is vital.
Agents need to be aware of the objects in the environment; whether
they are interactable and how to interact. When describing infor-
mation contained in the environment,we offer a novel thought. We
design a Building-Place-Goal three level data structure, shown in
Figure 15, to describe the environment. This structure enables us to
efficiently convey structured environmental information to large

Figure 10: The long-term memory mechanism of characters
involves extracting information of interest from short-term
memory and the blurring of older information.

Insight - Overall Process of the Contextual Incident: Cognitive
psychology emphasizes the holism of cognition, where people com-
bine information and relevant contexts to complete an integrated
cognitive process[53]. However, in our system, the information
filtered through the memory module remains a vast amount of
fragmented data, making it difficult for agents to integrate them for
holistic thinking. Therefore, we designed the Insight submodule
within the Cognition module to help simulate this holistic thinking
process. What’s more, we aim for Insight to reflect the diversity of
individual cognitive processes. Thus, we enable Insight to reference
the complete character structure, summarizing and reflecting on
all events of the day and the long-term memory. In practical tests,
we can intuitively perceive that each agent has distinctly unique
insights into daily events.

For example, on the first day, Benjamin realizes that becoming a
well-rounded individual requires not only technical breakthroughs
but also efforts in humanitarian care and social skills. On the second
day, Benjamin sees the potential for integrating technology with
the humanities, beginning to incorporate a humanitarian perspec-
tive into his technical explorations, seeking a harmonious balance
between the two. The procedure of such is shown in Figure 11.

3.2.4 Character Growth. Chain-like Update Process: After pro-
cessing external events through the Emotion and Cognition mod-
ules, the foundational materials for Agent evolution are prepared.
The Character Growth module is responsible for simulating the
personality update of agents, transforming daily evolutions into

xxx,
,

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

Figure 12: In the sandbox world, users can observe the Agent’s daily behavioral activities and inner thoughts.

language models, thus allowing Agents to fully consider existing en-
vironmental information and locations during their planning phase,
improving the efficiency of Agents to understand the environment.
The direct manifestation of this is that large language models will
aim to align their planning objectives as closely as possible with
the existing environmental functions and descriptions.

Figure 13: Environment data structure

4.1.2 NPC Action Execute. The daily plans generated by the Agent
planning module are read and translated into ScriptableObject-type
task description files in Unity. When the game time reaches the next
plan, the engine will drive the Agent to move to the target location
using the A-star algorithm, and upon arrival, play the correspond-
ing animation. To enhance the decoupling of work between the
agent architecture and the sandbox, we have detailed programmatic
descriptions of the operational rules in sandbox, such as the Agent’s
moving speed and spatial information descriptions. This way, the
agent architecture can directly generate Agent performance data
that fits the logic of the sandbox (for example, if the Sandbox screen
running time from the dormitory to the college is 15 minutes, then
the agent architecture will take this 15-minute moving time into
consideration in advance when executing). This approach not only
ensures the decoupling level during the team development process,

but also enables user to design and iterate environment setting
when art resource for sandbox is not available.

4.2 Using System
4.2.1 Environment Editing. Inspired by behavioral psychology, Evolv-
ing Agents is also envisioned as a research tool for the field. In be-
havioral psychology, external stimuli is one of the primary variables
in personality development or change. In this potential demand
scenario, we hope the system will allow users to easily modify
the environmental settings of the system to meet their needs in
the future. Environmental updates in the game interface require
corresponding art resources, but it is impractical to expect users
to provide these resources. However, as mentioned in section 4.2,
agent architecture and sandbox are highly decoupled. Users can
edit the environment and obtain simulation results without waiting
for the art scenes to update. To lower the learning threshold for
user editing, we have developed a tabular operation experience
for environmental editing. Users can directly control environmen-
tal variables by adjusting an online csv table, thereby achieving
adjustments to the living space of the Agent.

Figure 14: Users can directly update environmental setting
by adjusting an online csv table

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

4.2.2 Chat With Agent. Although the current research theme does
not encourage users to provide artificial stimuli beyond the simu-
lation process for Agents, we also build relevant user interaction
experiences in the Simulative System. We aim for interactions from
users to be consistent with other Agents from the perspective of
an Agent. Therefore, users can choose to initiate a conversation
with any Agent that is not currently engaged in a dialogue during
the system’s operation. This conversation will also be recorded and
summarized in the Agent’s own Dialog-memory, contributing to
the Agent’s cognitive process.

5 OBJECTIVE DATA VERIFICATION
The goal of Evolving Agents is to enable them to perform embodied
behaviors according to differentiated personalities in the interactive
simulation system and to evolve their personalities continuously
based on external information during interaction processes. Around
this goal, we propose three more specific research hypotheses:

• Evolving Agents can construct agents with perceivable and

believable differentiated personality traits.

• Evolving Agents’ personalities can undergo perceivable and
believable evolution during interactive simulation processes.
• The personality evolution of Evolving Agents can lead to per-
ceivable and believable changes in their behavior patterns.

The evaluation of believability and perceivability mentioned above
relies on human users’ observation and subjective assessment. How-
ever, before recruiting users for experimentation, we can first ana-
lyze the operational logs of the Agents to verify changes in personal-
ity and behavior patterns that have occurred during the simulation
from a machine metrics standpoint (like alpha and beta testing in
software development processes).

We implemented two types of objective data validations, using
the Big Five personality assessment and behavior difference analy-
sis respectively. By comparing with the ablation architecture, we
objectively verified that the Evolving Agents indeed exhibited per-
sonality evolution and corresponding behavioral changes during
the simulation process.

5.1 Big Five Personality Traits Assessment
We aim for Agents to define their current personality based on
objective scale questionnaires throughout the simulation process
and find the objective evidence of personality changes in Evolving
Agents by comparing results over time. The character structure of
Evolving Agents is represented based on the Big Five personality
traits. Therefore, we refer to existing Big Five personality analysis
questionnaires and equip Evolving Agents with the ability to fill out
questionnaires, enabling them to continuously undertake Big Five
Personality Inventory (BFI-44) assessments[41]and to output the
analysis results of the Big Five personality traits during the simula-
tion process. In the specific implementation of enabling Evolving
Agents to fill out questionnaires, we discover that even when we
constrain the Agent to the same state, the results of each BFI-44
assessment vary significantly. The large language models lack a
clear standard for reference and comparison. As a Result, we design
a process for filling out the same set of questions across multiple
days in parallel, asking the model to focus on the differences from

xxx,
,

day to day for a comprehensive questionnaire completion which ef-
fectively resolves the issue of lacking a clear standard and reference
for questionnaire completion across sessions.

Contrasted with the complete Evolving Agents architecture, we
have an ablated architecture that lacks the Insight, and Character
Growth components of the Personality system. The reason for this
ablation is that this version of the Evolving Agents architecture is
somewhat similar to previous Agent architectures, including the
basic processes of Plan-Action-Memory-Reflect, hence it has certain
referential value.

We use three Agents: Isabella, Benjamin, Sophia, for a seven-day
simulation within a sandbox, calculating their daily scores across
the five dimensions of the Big Five personality traits, as is shown
in Figure 16 and Figure 17, with the scoring method referenced.
Finally, we determine the difference values between each dimension
over two days for each person. Let

𝐷 = {BFI_EXT, BFI_AGR, BFI_CON, BAI_NEU, BAI_OPEN}

be the set of dimensions evaluated. For each dimension 𝑑 ∈ 𝐷,
given a series of scores 𝑠𝑑 defined as shown in below

𝑠𝑑 = {𝑠𝑑1, 𝑠𝑑2, . . . , 𝑠𝑑𝑛 },
where 𝑛 is the number of days, we assess the overall personality
change activityΔoverall for each person using the following formula:
𝐷
∑︁

𝑛−1
∑︁

(1)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)𝑠𝑑𝑖 − 𝑠𝑑,𝑖+1

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(2)

Δoverall =

1
𝐷 (𝑛 − 1)

𝑑=1

𝑖=1

The Big Five personality change states of Isabella, Benjamin and
Sophia, who have different initial personality settings, over seven
days are shown below

Figure 15: Results of the Big Five personality traits assess-
ment

xxx,
,

We can see that the Agents in the ablated group show no change
in their personality assessment results over the seven days, with
an average personality difference of 0 between every two days
for all three Agents. In contrast, Agents in the Full Architecture
clearly exhibit active personality change states. For Benjamin, the
Δoverall is 4.37; for Isabella, it is 6.52; and for Sophia, it is 6.77. This
data supports our claim to a great extent that the Evolving Agents
can lead to personality evolution in Agents during the simulation
process.

From the trends in changes across various dimensions, we also
discover that Agents with different personality exhibit distinct pat-
tern of personality evolution. For example, Benjamin, an introverted
and stable computer science student, is slowly adjusting his per-
sonality towards his target. In contrast, Sophia, a more creative
and active writer, experiences rapid changes in both neuroticism
and extraversion dimensions, which intuitively aligns with our
understanding of their individual personalities.

However, while displaying divergent changes, the three indi-
viduals also show certain similar development directions. Overall,
all three have shown a decrease in neuroticism, which might be
due to the positive bias in the content of large language models,
making it easier for agents to evolve towards more self-consistent
and peaceful personality directions.

5.2 Behavioral Similarity
In the Agent architecture, we limit the goal selection in the planning
phase to a finite number of abstract categories. This allows us
to conveniently measure the similarity of daily plan by encoding
each day’s plan and analyze them based on the Euclidean distance,
thereby providing a measure of behavioral differences between
days. Given a dataset representing daily goal counts, the Euclidean
distance between the behavior on two different days, day 𝑖 and day
𝑗, is defined by the formula:

𝐸 (𝑖, 𝑗) =

(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:116) 𝑁
∑︁

𝑘=1

(𝑥𝑖𝑘 − 𝑥 𝑗𝑘 )2

(3)

where 𝐸 (𝑖, 𝑗) represents the Euclidean distance between day 𝑖 and
day 𝑗, 𝑥𝑖𝑘 is the count of goal 𝑘 on day 𝑖, and 𝑥 𝑗𝑘 is the count of
the same goal on day 𝑗. 𝑁 is the total number of distinct goals
observed over all days. This calculation assumes that for any goal
not observed on a given day, its count is taken as 0.

Given a distance matrix 𝐷 of size 𝑛 × 𝑛, where 𝐷𝑖 𝑗 represents
the Euclidean distance between the behavior on days 𝑖 and 𝑗, the
overall activity level, denoted as 𝐴, is calculated as the average of
all upper triangular elements of 𝐷 excluding the diagonal. This
overall activity level is given by the formula:

𝐴 =

(cid:205)𝑛−1
𝑖=1

(cid:205)𝑛

𝑗=𝑖+1

𝐷𝑖 𝑗

𝑛 (𝑛−1)
2

(4)

𝑛 (𝑛−1)
where 𝑛 is the total number of days. The denominator,
,
2
represents the count of elements in the upper triangular part of 𝐷
excluding the diagonal, effectively counting each pair of days once.
We use the same ablation control group as in the Big Five per-
sonality trait analysis for the same reason. This is the version of

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

Evolving Agents most similar in architectural description to past
studies, hence it holds referential value.

We use three Agents: Isabella, Benjamin, Sophia for a seven-day
simulation within a Sandbox, calculating the behavioral differences
between days. The analysis results of behavioral similarity are as
follows: For Isabella, the activity level in the full architecture is

Figure 16: Results of the Behavioral similarity assessment

2.293, while the overall activity level in the ablated architecture is
1.416; for Benjamin, the overall activity level in the full architecture
is 2.152, while in the ablated architecture it is 1.742; for Sophia, the
overall activity level in the full architecture is 1.949, while in the
ablated architecture it is 1.474. It is evident that compared with the
ablated Agent architecture, Agents in the full architecture exhibited
more active behavioral changes.

When specifically planning behavior in the Plan module, there
are no differences in the input data composition between the full
architecture and the ablated architecture of Agent planning. The
only difference is that the full architecture agents receive evolved
personalities every day, whereas the ablated architecture repeats
the initial personality settings. This also indirectly verifies that
personality differences are one of the reasons affecting changes in
behavior patterns.

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

6 HUMAN EVALUATION
After validating the objective data, we prepared and conducted a
human evaluation experiment, continuing with the research hy-
potheses mentioned earlier. For Hypothesis 1, we asked human
evaluators whether the personality differences between different
Agents are perceptible and believable. Regarding Hypotheses 2 and
3, we asked human evaluators whether the personality differences
between different Agents are perceptible and believable to the users.

6.1 Evaluation Procedure
We recruited a total of 30 human evaluators (14 male, 16 female)
who signed informed consent forms to participate in our study.
Their ages ranged from 18 to 34 years, encompassing a variety of
disciplines and professions, with good reading and analytical skills,
and all having a bachelor’s degree or higher education.

Before the formal experiment, we conducted a preliminary study.
In this pre-experiment, we first selected a 10-day log of one of the
agents and presented it through front-end animations on the sim-
ulation platform for two human evaluators to assess. During the
pre-experiment, we identified the following issues: 1) In practice,
we found that human evaluators were overly distracted by images
and other irrelevant information, making it difficult for them to
focus on the agent’s personality growth and behavioral changes
themselves. 2) The amount of textual information from 10 days of
evolution was too overwhelming for general evaluators, making it
difficult for them to fully understand the complete process of the
agent’s changes over the 10 days; 3) The evolution of the agent’s
personality and behavior is a highly abstract and generalized simu-
lation of human personality evolution. Because we cannot observe
an agent for over a decade or more like we do with humans. Human
evaluators need to detach from the normal human perception of
time and focus on evaluating the evolution process itself.

Therefore, in the formal experiment, we used text records of
an agent’s logs over three consecutive days for user assessment.
Additionally, before the experiment, we emphasized to the human
evaluators the importance of reducing consideration of the time
factor and focusing on the believability of the evolutionary process
itself.

In the formal experiment, we first asked human evaluators to
spend about an hour reading and taking notes on the logs of three
agents and the logs of four ablated versions of one agent. We also
asked them to use the think aloud method to communicate their
thoughts to the experimenters during the reading process. After
completing the reading, we asked them to fill out questionnaires
for both the control and ablation experiments based on their notes.
During this process, they could continually refer back to the reading
materials to ensure the accuracy of their choices. The questionnaires
we set up focused on two main aspects: user believability rating,
and ablation control experiments.

6.2 User Believability Rating
In the user believability rating, we posed two questions regarding
the human-like effects of Evolving Agents: "How similar are the
personality and behavioral differences among the three groups of
agents to those between real humans?" and "How similar is the
growth trajectory of personality and behavior of the three groups

xxx,
,

of agents to that of real humans?" We asked the human evaluators
to score these two questions on a scale of 0 to 5.

In the user believability rating, the scores for the human-likeness
of personality and behavioral differences of Evolving Agents, after
a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, yielded a statistic of T = 11.0, p < 0.001.
This very small p-value indicates that the assessed personality dif-
ferences are statistically significant compared to a neutral rating (3).
This can be interpreted to mean that the scores in the survey were
generally above the median, with participants broadly considering
the personality differences to be significant and reasonable. This
effectively supports Hypothesis 1: Evolving Agents can construct
agents with perceptible and believable differentiated personality
traits. For the scores on the human-likeness of the growth trajectory

Figure 17: believability of personality and behavioral differ-
ences of Evolving Agents

of personality and behavior of Evolving Agents, after a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, the statistic was T = 11.5, p < 0.001. The very low p-
value indicates that the null hypothesis can be rejected, suggesting
there is sufficient evidence to claim that the growth trajectory and
personality development scores are statistically significantly higher
than the median level (3), meaning participants generally found the
growth trajectory and personality development to be obvious and
reasonable within the assessed context. This effectively supports
Hypotheses 2 and 3: In interactive simulations, the personalities of
Evolving Agents can undergo perceptible and believable evolution.

6.3 Ablation Experiment
To validate the positive impact of various modules within the Evolv-
ing Agents on both personality differentiation and personality evo-
lution in terms of perceptibility and believability, we conducted
two degrees of ablation studies on the architecture of the Evolving
Agent. Compared to the full Evolving Agents architecture, Group 2
had the Cognitive Feelings, Insight, and Character Growth parts
of the Personality system removed, consistent with section 5.1,
while Group 3 was further simplified from Group 2 by simplifying
the Character Structure, adopting a character description method
similar to those used in other existing embodied agent sandbox
simulation systems. We asked human evaluators to rank the human-
likeness of the growth trajectories of personality and behavior for

xxx,
,

Figure 18: believability of the growth trajectory of personal-
ity and behavior of Evolving Agents

Figure 19: Result of ablation experiment

four experimental groups and to describe in words the reasons for
their rankings.

In the ablation experiment, we obtained 30 sets of ranking data
from user studies. Based on this data, we calculated the TrueSkill
ranking scores for the four experimental groups and computed
Cohen’s d values to quantify the strength of differences between
groups. In the TrueSkill scoring system, the 𝜇 value represents the
average performance level of an experimental group, while the 𝜎
value measures the uncertainty of the scores. Additionally, to ex-
plore the statistical significance of these results, we conducted
a Kruskal-Wallis test, a non-parametric alternative to one-way
ANOVA, to confirm the overall statistical significance of differences
under different experimental groups. To pinpoint the exact sources
of differences, namely which specific group comparisons showed
significant differences, we used the Dunn test for pairwise compar-
isons between experimental groups, and p-values were adjusted
using the Holm-Bonferroni method. The experimental results are
illustrated in a bar chart, with the height of the bars corresponding

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

to the 𝜇 value and the top of the bars marked with error lines,
indicating the 𝜎 value.

The final result shows, Group 1 achieved the best scoring re-
sults (𝜇=29.89; 𝜎=1.61), followed by Group 2 (𝜇=23.18; 𝜎=1.13), and
then Group 3 (𝜇=22.95; 𝜎=1.15). Comparing the highest-scoring
Group 1 with the composite scores of the other three groups, the
Cohen’s d value of 5.33 indicates that Group 1 performed signifi-
cantly better than Groups 2, 3, and 4 combined. The Dunn post-hoc
test, both uncorrected and corrected using the Holm-Bonferroni
method, showed that the difference between Group 1 and all other
groups (Groups 2, 3, and 4) remained significant, while there was
no significant difference among Groups 2, 3, and 4.

Among all experimental control groups, Group 4 performed the
worst (𝜇=21.16; 𝜎=1.18 ). Surprisingly, the human group was per-
ceived by users to have the lowest level of anthropomorphism.
Following the experiment, feedback from users based on the low-
est scores of Group 4 suggested that they found the behavior and
personality change process of real humans too stable, with barely
any changes observable. This points to a potential issue in experi-
mental design: real humans indeed do not exhibit many behavioral
or personality changes over short periods and our routines might
be somewhat mechanical and dull in a sense. However, overall, the
comparison of the first three groups in the ablation experiment,
combined with the user credibility rating, effectively supports the
three research hypotheses focused on in the study: 1) Evolving
Agents can construct agents with perceptible and believable differ-
entiated personality traits; 2) In the interactive simulation process,
the personalities of Evolving Agents can undergo perceptible and be-
lievable evolution; 3) The personality evolution of Evolving Agents
can influence their behavior patterns to undergo perceptible and
believable changes, and the ablation experiment method confirmed
that Evolving Agents plays a key role in supporting these research
hypotheses.

7 SUPPLEMENT INSIGHT WORKSHOP
During the inspiration experiment phase, we primarily evaluated
the inspirational effects and limitations of Evolving Agents as design
probes on designers’ thinking and design processes. We recruited
9 users from the design field, aged between 22-50 years, covering
multiple design directions such as architectural design, industrial
design, interaction design, game design, etc., all with at least a
bachelor’s degree.

In the experiment, we first had the designer participants spend
30 minutes observing the daily logs of personality and behavior
for 3 agents, discussing these logs, and writing down design in-
sights generated from them on paper. Following that, we facilitated
a brainstorming session where each designer discussed and asso-
ciated their own and others’ insights, continuously adding new
insights.

Lastly, we asked each designer to step forward to present their
summary of views and fill out a five-point scale questionnaire on
the inspirational effect of Evolving Agents as design probes. The
scoring results are as shown in the following graph.

Most designers were surprised by such a system design and
provided us with many innovative ideas on how such embodied
agent simulation systems could be integrated with design processes.

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

Figure 20: Evolving agents score as heuristic effects of design-
ing probes

For example, a discussant with a background in environmental
design believed that this system could be used to simulate users’
experiences and feedback in certain spatial environments, thus
obtaining firsthand design opinions. A student specializing in drama
and film thought it could be possible to draw inspiration from the
Agents’ lives in a sandbox world to aid in their story creation, while
a student of service design believed this system could help explore
new service scenarios tailored to specific groups.

8 DISCUSSION
8.1 Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Agent
architecture Construction Thinking

Currently, there are many simulation Agent architectures with rel-
atively complete capabilities in behavior, learning and interaction.
The architecture of these architectures essentially continues the
traditional design philosophy of agents, built around a machine ar-
chitecture concept that encompasses input, processing, and output
from Perception to Mind-like thinking and then to Action. With the
development of large language models to this day, their emergent
general abilities and intent recognition greatly facilitate interdisci-
plinary theoretical transfer for researchers designing AI systems or
Human-Agent Interaction (HAI), focusing on the question of "how
to create embodied agents with diverse and dynamic personalities."
In the era of natural language models, AI can exhibit stronger
transfer abilities and general capabilities, and can interact with
humans through natural language. This characteristic endows nat-
ural language models with the ability to "think about problems
through natural language." This feature allows us to imitate the
entire human cognitive process, simulating human thinking and
output in various modules in a natural language manner.

Based on such technological transformation, we believe that the
current approach to constructing agent architectures can be divided
into two steps. Firstly, map the analysis architecture used in psy-
chology for such human behaviors into computationally feasible
processes and architectures. Secondly, in the specific module design,
based on relevant psychological theories and combined with hu-
man analysis and processing experience, write and debug prompt
structures that the natural language models can understand. This

xxx,
,

ensures that the entire process and specific processing steps are
more human-like for large language models.

8.2 The Potential and Limitations of Embodied

Agents’ Applications

8.2.1 The Prospects of Embodied Agents in Sandbox Simulation Sys-
tems. During the actual experiments, many human evaluators are
confused, feeling that the experiences from all four experimental
groups are quite human-like, making it difficult to clearly distin-
guish which one is a real human. Surprisingly, the performance
of real humans is actually the lowest (possibly because our hu-
man actor has a stable mood and a rather mundane life). Most
experimenters tell us they mainly rely on language style and subtle
emotional differences to judge whether an agent is human or AI,
but the overall feeling is already very close, reaching a degree of
verisimilitude.

Furthermore, users interact with embodied agent simulation sys-
tems primarily through natural language, a mode of interaction that
is very friendly to researchers from all fields, especially non-expert
users, as they can easily observe and study an agent’s personality,
thoughts, and behaviors directly. We believe the outputs from each
module in this process can greatly aid research in design studies,
psychology, sociology, anthropology, and other disciplines.

Perhaps in the future, developed AI will be able to construct
highly abstract, high-dimensional models of human personality
development. AI can predict a person’s personality development
changes more accurately and directly without the need for us to
build a simulation system to continuously supply the environment
and events needed for this prediction process. The "one-click pre-
diction" technology model may become the main technical route
for our future research on individual development and even most
of human behavioral psychology.

However, we believe sandbox-style simulation systems still hold
very positive value. Although black-box AI models are used in the
system to execute specific units such as characters’ thinking and
behavior, when we look at the entire system, the journey from
planning to behavior, from behavior to thinking, and finally to
personality development, is actually an interpretable and trace-
able "white-box mode." Compared to letting future developed AI
directly provide answers, we believe the process information and
forward-deriving logic provided by the simulation system will bet-
ter enhance the interpretability and transparency of HAI systems.
Users can also better understand the system and the human behav-
ioral psychology explored behind it through interaction with such
a system.

8.2.2
Limitations of large model foundational capabilities on agents.
During the actual design and testing process of Evolving Agents,
we also discovered several limitations in the application of embod-
ied agents. First, due to the positive bias in the content of large
language models, the growth trajectory of agents simulated over
time may be overly positive, which could lead to a convergence in
the development direction of agents as time progresses. Secondly,
the state of Agents simulated by large language models are akin to
role-playing which may prevent Agents from fully understanding
the complex and subtle emotions humans experience in response to
real-life events and often resulting in emotions that are too positive

xxx,
,

or somewhat confusing. Finally, since real humans are more contra-
dictory and complex, and more perplexed and repetitive, whether
it is possible to simulate humans in a more complex and realistic
manner may require further in-depth research by psychologists
and computer scientists together.

8.3 Ethics and Societal Impact
As the technology of large language models and agent architec-
tures evolves, this field will also trigger more reflection on ethics
and morality. Firstly, during the usage process, designers and re-
searchers from other fields need to be cautious of becoming overly
reliant on embodied agents. These agents can only simulate the
thinking and behavior processes of humans but cannot fully display
the complexity and diversity of real humans. Due to the limitations
of the architecture, the characteristics of underlying models, and
the differences between human cognition and AI cognition, AI will
inevitably have instances of inaccurately simulating real humans.
Therefore, we suggest using embodied agents only as divergent
tools in the early stages of design or research. In actual design and
in-depth study, real humans should still be the subject of research
to truly understand people.

Secondly, for the whole society, the increasing capabilities and
human-likeness of embodied agents will make it increasingly diffi-
cult for humans to distinguish between AI and people. Humans may
form broader and more profound emotional connections with AI
agents, leading to changes in social relationships. This may inspire
us to reflect on connections between humans and society. Although
we will inevitably enter a world where virtual and reality merge,
we still recommend employing more means and methods to help
humans focus more on real life and establish more connections
with people around them.

9 CONCLUSION
This paper introduces Evolving Agents, interactive computational
agents that simulate the diverse and dynamic human personality.
We describe an novel architecture based on psychological model
mapping, which can perform embodied behaviors according to dif-
ferentiated personalities in an interactive simulation system and
undergo continuous personality evolution based on external infor-
mation during the interaction process. Evaluations in the sandbox
simulation system show that our architecture creates agents with
believable and perceptible personalized behaviors as well as a bidi-
rectional evolution process of personality behaviors. Additionally,
through workshops, we have preliminarily verified that such sys-
tems have a significant design inspiration during the interaction
process with designers, demonstrating the development potential of
embodied agents. Looking ahead, we suggest that Evolving Agents
can be applied in the early stages of design, as well as in related
research in psychology, sociology, and anthropology.

10 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This article was funded by the Important International Academic
Conference Award Fund for Graduate Students of Tongji University
and the Key Technology Research and Demonstration Project of
Hydrogen Town Fuel Cell Integrated Energy System.

Jiale Li and Jiayang Li, et al.

REFERENCES
[1] Christian Erik Kampmann.

ior (1996).
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/sdr.1483.

System Dynamics Review, 28(4):370–395, 2012.

Feedback loop gains and system behav-
_eprint:

[2] Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior | Proceedings of
the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
[3] Zhilin Wang, Yu Ying Chiu, and Yu Cheung Chiu. Humanoid Agents: Platform
for Simulating Human-like Generative Agents, October 2023. arXiv:2310.05418
[cs].

[4] Jiaju Lin, Haoran Zhao, Aochi Zhang, Yiting Wu, Huqiuyue Ping, and Qin Chen.
AgentSims: An Open-Source Sandbox for Large Language Model Evaluation,
August 2023. arXiv:2308.04026 [cs].

[5] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke
Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied
Agent with Large Language Models, October 2023. arXiv:2305.16291 [cs].
[6] Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi
Zhu, Andrew Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Mine-
Dojo: Building Open-Ended Embodied Agents with Internet-Scale Knowledge.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18343–18362, December
2022.

[7] Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang,
Gao Huang, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang,
and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the Minecraft: Generally Capable Agents for Open-
World Environments via Large Language Models with Text-based Knowledge
and Memory, June 2023. arXiv:2305.17144 [cs].

[8] Siyuan Chen, Mengyue Wu, Kenny Q. Zhu, Kunyao Lan, Zhiling Zhang, and
Lyuchun Cui. LLM-empowered Chatbots for Psychiatrist and Patient Simulation:
Application and Evaluation, May 2023. arXiv:2305.13614 [cs].

[9] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch.
Improving Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models through Multiagent
Debate, May 2023. arXiv:2305.14325 [cs].

[10] Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B.
Tenenbaum, Tianmin Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building Cooperative Embodied
Agents Modularly with Large Language Models, February 2024. arXiv:2307.02485
[cs].

[11] Marvin Zuckerman. Psychobiology of Personality. Cambridge University Press,

May 1991. Google-Books-ID: TA01Duy4RLwC.

[12] Nasser Ghasem-Aghaee and Tuncer I. Ören. Cognitive complexity and dynamic
personality in agent simulation. Computers in Human Behavior, 23(6):2983–2997,
November 2007.

[13] Tuncer I. Ören. Dynamic Templates and Semantic Rules for Simulation Advisors
and Certifiers. In Paul A. Fishwick and Richard B. Modjeski, editors, Knowledge-
Based Simulation: Methodology and Application, pages 53–76. Springer, New York,
NY, 1991.

[14] Sil Hamilton. Blind Judgement: Agent-Based Supreme Court Modelling With

GPT, January 2023. arXiv:2301.05327 [cs].

[15] Melanie Swan, Takashi Kido, Eric Roland, and Renato P. dos Santos. Math Agents:
Computational Infrastructure, Mathematical Embedding, and Genomics, July
2023. arXiv:2307.02502 [cs, q-bio].

[16] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong,
Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao
Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou,
Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan Dou, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng,
Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, and Tao
Gui. The Rise and Potential of Large Language Model Based Agents: A Survey,
September 2023. arXiv:2309.07864 [cs].

[17] Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo,
Douglas Eck, and Aleksandra Faust. A Real-World WebAgent with Planning, Long
Context Understanding, and Program Synthesis, February 2024. arXiv:2307.12856
[cs].

[18] Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria,
Yuanzhi Li, Tom Mitchell, and Shrimai Prabhumoye. Plan, Eliminate, and
Track – Language Models are Good Teachers for Embodied Agents, May 2023.
arXiv:2305.02412 [cs].

[19] Shang-Ling Hsu, Raj Sanjay Shah, Prathik Senthil, Zahra Ashktorab, Casey Dugan,
Werner Geyer, and Diyi Yang. Helping the Helper: Supporting Peer Counselors
via AI-Empowered Practice and Feedback, May 2023. arXiv:2305.08982 [cs].
[20] J.D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y. Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian Yang.
Why Johnny Can’t Prompt: How Non-AI Experts Try (and Fail) to Design LLM
Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’23, pages 1–21, New York, NY, USA, April 2023. Association for
Computing Machinery.

[21] Advait Bhat, Saaket Agashe, Parth Oberoi, Niharika Mohile, Ravi Jangir, and
Interacting with Next-Phrase Suggestions: How Suggestion
Anirudha Joshi.
Systems Aid and Influence the Cognitive Processes of Writing. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’23, pages
436–452, New York, NY, USA, March 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.

Evolving Agents: Interactive Simulation of Dynamic and Diverse Human Personalities

xxx,
,

[22] 3DALL-E: Integrating Text-to-Image AI in 3D Design Workflows | Proceedings

of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference.

[23] Vishesh Kalvakurthi, Aparna S. Varde, and John Jenq. Hey Dona! Can you help
me with student course registration?, March 2023. arXiv:2303.13548 [cs].
[24] Masum Hasan, Cengiz Ozel, Sammy Potter, and Ehsan Hoque. SAPIEN: Affective
Virtual Agents Powered by Large Language Models*. In 2023 11th International
Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction Workshops and
Demos (ACIIW), pages 1–3, September 2023.

[47] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang,
Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-
Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models, April
2023. arXiv:2205.10625 [cs].

[48] The "What" and "Why" of Goal Pursuits: Human Needs and the Self-

Determination of Behavior: Psychological Inquiry: Vol 11, No 4.

[49] RobeRt Snowden. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2006 375 pages (£27.99

paperback).

[25] Human-level play in the game of Diplomacy by combining language models with

[50] An Introduction to the Five-Factor Model and Its Applications - McCrae - 1992 -

Journal of Personality - Wiley Online Library.

[51] APA Dictionary of Psychology.
[52] Robert L. Solso, M. Kimberly MacLin, and Otto H. MacLin. Cognitive psychology,
7th ed. Cognitive psychology, 7th ed. Pearson Education New Zealand, Auckland,
New Zealand, 2005. Pages: xxi, 602.

[53] Marvin Minsky. Society Of Mind. Simon and Schuster, March 1988. Google-

Books-ID: bLDLllfRpdkC.

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009

strategic reasoning | Science.

[26] Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and
Bernard Ghanem. CAMEL: Communicative Agents for "Mind" Exploration of
Large Scale Language Model Society. March 2023. Publisher: arXiv.

[27] J.D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Heather Wei, Amy Xiao, Kitty Gu, Grace Jung, Matthew G
Lee, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian Yang. Herding AI Cats: Lessons from Designing
a Chatbot by Prompting GPT-3.
In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing
Interactive Systems Conference, DIS ’23, pages 2206–2220, New York, NY, USA,
July 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.

[28] Ruiyang Ren, Peng Qiu, Yingqi Qu, Jing Liu, Wayne Xin Zhao, Hua Wu, Ji-Rong
Wen, and Haifeng Wang. BASES: Large-scale Web Search User Simulation with
Large Language Model based Agents, February 2024. arXiv:2402.17505 [cs].
[29] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of
Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’23, pages 1–22, New York, NY, USA,
October 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.

[30] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang,
Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei,
and Ji-Rong Wen. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents,
March 2024. arXiv:2308.11432 [cs].

[31] Becoming Modern.
[32] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models,
March 2023. arXiv:2210.03629 [cs].

[33] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdh-
ery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu,
Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey
Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy
Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. PaLM-E: An Embodied Multimodal
Language Model, March 2023. arXiv:2303.03378 [cs].

[34] Greg Serapio-García, Mustafa Safdari, Clément Crepy, Luning Sun, Stephen Fitz,
Peter Romero, Marwa Abdulhai, Aleksandra Faust, and Maja Matarić. Personality
Traits in Large Language Models, September 2023. arXiv:2307.00184 [cs].
[35] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu,
Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah,
Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM
Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation, October 2023. arXiv:2308.08155 [cs].
[36] [2305.16291] Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language

Models.

[37] Ruibo Liu, Ruixin Yang, Chenyan Jia, Ge Zhang, Denny Zhou, Andrew M. Dai,
Diyi Yang, and Soroush Vosoughi. Training Socially Aligned Language Models
on Simulated Social Interactions, October 2023. arXiv:2305.16960 [cs].

[38] Francisco J. Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. The Embodied Mind,
revised edition: Cognitive Science and Human Experience. MIT Press, January 2017.
Google-Books-ID: bxLiDQAAQBAJ.

[39] Quan Tu, Chuanqi Chen, Jinpeng Li, Yanran Li, Shuo Shang, Dongyan Zhao, Ran
Wang, and Rui Yan. CharacterChat: Learning towards Conversational AI with
Personalized Social Support, August 2023. arXiv:2308.10278 [cs].

[40] Reza Habibi, Johannes Pfau, Jonattan Holmes, and Magy Seif El-Nasr. Empathetic
AI for Empowering Resilience in Games, February 2023. arXiv:2302.09070 [cs].
[41] Oliver P. John and Sanjay Srivastava. The Big Five Trait taxonomy: History,
measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In Handbook of personality: Theory
and research, 2nd ed, pages 102–138. Guilford Press, New York, NY, US, 1999.
[42] Charles K. Coe. The MBTI: Potential Uses and Misuses in Personnel Administra-
tion. Public Personnel Management, 21(4):511–522, December 1992. Publisher:
SAGE Publications Inc.

[43] Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths.
Cognitive Architectures for Language Agents, March 2024. arXiv:2309.02427
[cs].

[44] Graham Caron and Shashank Srivastava.

Identifying and Manipulating the
Personality Traits of Language Models, December 2022. arXiv:2212.10276 [cs].
[45] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting
Zhuang. HuggingGPT: Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and its Friends in Hug-
ging Face. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:38154–38180,
December 2023.

[46] Alba Curry and Amanda Cercas Curry. Computer says "No": The Case Against

Empathetic Conversational AI, July 2023. arXiv:2212.10983 [cs].

