4
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
5
5
4
1
.
3
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Changing human’s impression of empathy from agent by verbalizing
agent’s position

Takahiro Tsumura1 and Seiji Yamada1

Abstract— As anthropomorphic agents (AI and robots) are
increasingly used in society, empathy and trust between people
and agents are becoming increasingly important. A better
understanding of agents by people will help to improve the
problems caused by the future use of agents in society. In
the past, there has been a focus on the importance of self-
disclosure and the relationship between agents and humans in
their interactions. In this study, we focused on the attributes
of self-disclosure and the relationship between agents and
people. An experiment was conducted to investigate hypotheses
on trust and empathy with agents through six attributes of
self-disclosure (opinions and attitudes, hobbies, work, money,
personality, and body) and through competitive and cooperative
relationships before a robotic agent performs a joint task. The
experiment consisted of two between-participant factors: six
levels of self-disclosure attributes and two levels of relationship
with the agent. The results showed that the two factors had no
effect on trust in the agent, but there was statistical significance
for the attribute of self-disclosure regarding a person’s empathy
toward the agent. In addition, statistical significance was found
regarding the agent’s ability to empathize with a person as
perceived by the person only in the case where the type of
relationship, competitive or cooperative, was presented. The
results of this study could lead to an effective method for
building relationships with agents, which are increasingly used
in society.

I. INTRODUCTION

Humans live in society and use a variety of tools such as
ChatGPT and generative image AI, and today’s AI issues are
focused on the trustworthy and ethical use of AI technology.
Kaplan et al. [1] aimed to identify the key factors that predict
trust in AI, and they examined three predictive categories
and subcategories from data from 65 papers: human char-
acteristics and capabilities, AI performance and attributes,
and contextual challenges. All categories examined were
significant predictors of trust in AI. The more AI is used
in human society, the more trust in AI is discussed, and
a key issue is that the failure to establish appropriate trust
in AI
relationships leads to overconfidence and distrust
agents, which in turn leads to poor task performance.

When performing tasks with an AI, it is also important
to consider ways to repair trust in the AI. K¨ahk¨onen et
al. [2] systematically reviewed trust repair research con-
ducted over the past two decades to provide researchers
and managers with comprehensive insights and directions
for future research. The review suggested that early use of
trust repair strategies for small violations can prevent these

1Takahiro Tsumura and Seiji Yamada is with Department of Informatics,
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Tokyo, Japan.
Also Takahiro Tsumura and Seiji Yamada is with Digital Content and Media
Sciences Research Division, National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan.

violations from escalating into larger violations and, in turn,
increase the efficiency and effectiveness of trust repair with
employees. Bunting et al. [3] used insights from focus group
discussions on newly created trust, mistrust, and distrust
questions to identify how citizens perceive these different
concepts and how these perceptions are gendered. They then
used the new survey data they collected to examine how the
focus group results influenced survey responses and which
survey items were most likely to effectively measure the three
concepts.

Along with trust, we often empathize with artifacts. Hu-
mans are known to have a tendency to treat artifacts as if they
were human in the media equation. However, some humans
do not accept these agents [4]. Empathy is closely related to
trust. As agents permeate society in the future, it is hoped that
they will have an element of human acceptance. Omdahl [5]
broadly classified empathy into three types: (1) affective
empathy, which is an emotional response to the emotional
state of another person; (2) cognitive empathy, defined as
a cognitive understanding of the emotional state of another
person; and (3) empathy that includes the above two types of
empathy. Preston and de Waal [6] suggested that at the heart
of empathic response is a mechanism that allows the observer
to access the subjective emotional state of the subject. They
defined the Perception Action Model (PAM) and integrated
different perspectives in empathy. They defined empathy as
three types: (a) sharing or being influenced by the emotional
states of others, (b) evaluating the reasons for emotional
states, and (c) having the ability to identify and incorporate
other perspectives.

In the present study, we investigated the factors that
contribute to trust and empathy toward agents to enhance
their evaluation prior to performing a task. The definition
of empathy in this study is empathy toward an agent, not
having the agent acquire empathic competence. An agent’s
empathic capacity in this study is what makes people per-
ceive that the agent can empathize with them. Through the
self-introductions used in the experiment, participants will
be asked to assess whether or not they have empathy for an
agent.

II. RELATED WORK

We summarized some of the previous studies on trust in
AI. Noting that lack of trust is one of the main obstacles
standing in the way of taking full advantage of AI, Gillath
et al. [7] focused on increasing trust in AI through emotional
means. Specifically,
they tested the association between
attachment style, an individual difference that describes how

 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing attachment

people feel, think, and act in relationships, and trust in AI.
Results showed that
insecurity de-
creased trust, while increasing attachment security increased
trust in AI. Focusing on clinicians as the primary users of AI
systems in healthcare, Asan et al. [8] presented the factors
that shape trust between clinicians and AI. They focused
on key trust-related issues to consider when developing AI
systems for clinical use.

With the emphasis on research on trust in human rela-
tionships, research on trust in AI agents has also received
attention. In a study of trustworthy AI agents, Maehigashi et
al. [9] investigated how beeps emitted by a social robot with
anthropomorphic physicality affect human trust in the robot.
They found that (1) sounds just prior to a higher performance
increased trust when the robot performed correctly, and (2)
sounds just prior to a lower performance decreased trust to
a greater extent when the robot performed inaccurately. To
determine how anthropomorphic physicality affects human
trust
in agents, Maehigashi et al. [10] also investigated
whether human trust in social robots with anthropomorphic
physicality is similar to trust in AI agents and humans. Also,
they investigated whether trust in social robots is similar to
trust in AI agents and humans. The results showed that trust
in social robots was basically not similar to trust in AI agents
or humans, and was entrenched between the two.

Maehigashi [11] experimentally investigated the nature of
human trust in communication robots compared to trust in
other people and AI systems. Results showed that trust in
robots in computational tasks that yield a single solution
is essentially similar to that in AI systems, and partially
similar to trust in others in emotion recognition tasks that
allow multiple interpretations. Okamura and Yamada [12]
proposed a method for adaptive trust calibration that consists
of a framework for detecting inappropriate calibration con-
ditions by monitoring the user’s trust behavior and cognitive
cues, called “trust calibration cues,” that prompt the user to
resume trust calibration. Okamura and Yamada [13] focused
their research on trust alignment as a way to detect and
mitigate inappropriate trust alignment, and they addressed
these research questions using a behavior-based approach to
understanding calibration status. The results demonstrate that
adaptive presentation of trust calibration cues can facilitate
trust adjustments more effectively than traditional system
transparency approaches.

We also considered the design of empathy factors from
previous studies of anthropomorphic agents using empathy.
Tsumura and Yamada [14] focused on self-disclosure from
agents to humans in order to enhance human empathy toward
anthropomorphic agents, and they experimentally investi-
gated the potential for self-disclosure by agents to promote
human empathy. Tsumura and Yamada [15] also focused on
tasks in which humans and agents engage in a variety of in-
teractions, and they investigated the properties of agents that
have a significant impact on human empathy toward them.
To clarify the empathy between agents/robots and humans,
Paiva represented the empathy and behavior of empathetic
agents (called empathy agents in HAI and HRI studies) in

two different ways: targeting empathy and empathizing with
observers [16]. Rahmanti et al. [17] designed a chatbot with
artificial empathic motivational support for dieting called
“SlimMe” and investigated how people responded to the
diet bot. They proposed a text-based emotional analysis
that simulates artificial empathic responses to enable the
bot to recognize users’ emotions. J´auregui et al. [18] found
evidence to support or oppose a robotic mirroring framework,
resulting in increased interest in self-tracking technology for
health care.

We also present some previous studies on the attributes of
self-disclosure and its relationship to agents. Pan et al. [19]
examined the effect of exposure to online support-seeking
posts containing different
levels of self-disclosure depth
(baseline, peripheral, core) affecting the quality (person-
centeredness and politeness) of participants’ messages pro-
viding support. A study of cooperative and competitive tasks
was conducted by Ruissen and de Bruijn [20]. In the study,
cooperative and competitive tasks were tested using Tetris.
The results confirmed that the cooperative task did not reduce
self-integration, but the competitive task did.

Collins and Miller [21] aimed to clarify and review this
literature by using a meta-analytic procedure to evaluate the
evidence for three different disclosure preference effects. For
each effect, they found a significant relationship favoring
disclosure. (a) people who make intimate disclosures tend
to be liked more than those who disclose at lower levels; (b)
people disclose more to those they initially favor; and (c)
people like other people as a result of disclosing information
to them. Meng and Dai [22] investigated when and how
effective chatbot emotional support is in reducing people’s
stress and worry. The results showed that the positive effects
of emotional support on anxiety reduction were enhanced
when conversation partners mutually self-disclosed.

III. MATERIALS AND METHODS

A. Hypotheses

The purpose of this study is to examine whether self-
disclosure attributes and types of relationships with partic-
ipants influence trust and empathy toward agents, focusing
on the time before agents perform tasks with participants.
This objective could be an important factor in promoting
the use of agents in society. The following hypotheses are
formulated in this study. If these hypotheses are supported,
this research will be valuable in developing agents that are
more acceptable to humans. On the basis of the above, four
hypotheses were examined.

H1: Trust toward the agent changes with the attribute of

self-disclosure.

H2: Trust toward the agent increases when a cooperative
relationship is presented rather than a competitive
relationship.

H3: Empathy toward the agent changes with the attribute
of self-disclosure, but does not change with the type
of relationship presented.

H4: The empathy capacity of the agent does not change
with the attribute of self-disclosure, but it changes with
the type of relationship presented.

H1 and H2 investigate whether trust in an agent is affected
by the two factors in this study, that is, six levels of self-
disclosure attributes and two levels of relationship with the
agent [21], [22]. Previous studies with people have shown
that
the content of self-disclosure affects trust, and that
cooperative relationships are more likely to gain trust than
competitive relationships. For this reason, we investigate
whether trust in agents changes similarly to that in people.
Previous studies by Tsumura and Yamada [14], [15] have
shown that H3 is a key factor in the relationship between trust
and self-disclosure, and the present study will investigate the
impact of each factor in detail. H4 is an investigation of
agents’ capacity for empathy. Previous studies have shown
that the amount of self-disclosure affects empathy, and since
the amount of self-disclosure in this study is almost the
the ability to
same, we assumed that
empathize [19]. Regarding the type of relationship presented,
we also considered that the participant’s evaluation of the
agent’s empathy ability would change as the impression of
the agent changes depending on the relationship [20].

it does not affect

B. Experimental details

The experiment consisted of a video viewing task, fol-
lowed by three different surveys. The experiment was con-
ducted in an online environment using Yahoo! Crowdsourc-
ing. The online environment used in this experiment has
already been used as one experimental environment [14],
[15], [23]. A flowchart of this experiment is shown in Figure
1. Participants learned about self-disclosure attributes and
their relationship with the agent by watching a video of the
agent giving a self-introduction. This study’s agent was a
learning support agent, and the situation is that the agent is
giving a self-introduction before providing learning support.
In the videos, the agent used the same gestures regardless of
the factors, and the videos were silent, so self-introductions
were done via text message. None of the videos were longer
than 2 minutes, and participants could not proceed to a
questionnaire without confirming that they had watched the
video.

Because the experiment was conducted on a participant-
to-participant factorial basis, all participants watched only
one video out of 12 combinations and completed the ques-
tionnaire. The questionnaire consisted of three types of
questions: trust in the agent, empathy toward the agent, and
the agent’s ability to empathize. In addition, one question
involved a self-disclosure check used in the task and a
confirmation that the participant had watched the video.

The experiment was conducted at 12 levels in total, with 6
levels of self-disclosure attributes and 2 levels of relationship
with the agent as 2 factors. The independent variables were
self-disclosure attributes (opinions and attitudes, hobbies,
work, money, personality, and body) and relationship with
the agent (competitive and cooperative). The three dependent

variables were trust in the agent, empathy toward the agent,
and the agent’s capacity for empathy.

C. Participants

We recruited participants through Yahoo! Crowdsourcing
and paid 40 yen (=0.27 dollars) per participant as compensa-
tion. We created a web page for the experiment using Google
Forms and uploaded and embedded a video created for the
experiment on YouTube.

There was a total of 587 participants. Cronbach’s α
coefficient was then used to determine the reliability of the
trust questionnaire, and the coefficient was determined to be
0.9160-0.9612 in all conditions. In addition, Cronbach’s α
coefficient was used for the reliability of the empathy ques-
tionnaire for agents, and the coefficients were determined to
be 0.6965 to 0.8224. Cronbach’s α coefficient was used for
the reliability of the questionnaire for empathy capacity of
agents, and the coefficients were determined to range from
0.7904 to 0.8680.

In the analysis, 47 participants in each of all conditions
were analyzed in the order of their participation. Thus, the
total number of participants used in the analysis was 564.
The mean age was 48.90 years (standard deviation = 11.03
years), with a minimum age of 20 years and a maximum age
of 79 years. There were also 432 males and 132 females.

D. Self-disclosure attributes

In this study, we prepared six levels of self-disclosure
attributes. The reason for preparing six levels was to inves-
tigate the impression that the agent’s self-disclosure gives to
others, on the basis of previous studies that have classified
self-disclosure into six categories [24]. The content of each
type of self-disclosure is as follows. In the content related
to opinions and attitudes, the agent talked about the most
important factors in their learning. For hobbies, the agent
talked about its love of learning. For work, the agent talked
about the pressures of work in learning support. For money,
the agent discussed how money is spent on learning. For
personality, the agent talked about what people say about
its personality. For body, the agent talked about its own
appearance.

In all conditions, the amount of conversation was kept
nearly uniform, and participants spent approximately the
same amount of time watching the videos. Each attribute
of self-disclosure was recognized by the participants; the
results of the chi-square test showed that χ2(25)=1043, p <
0.01, and the results of the residual analysis showed that
the participants correctly recognized the attribute of self-
disclosure. On the basis of these results, a manipulation
check for each attribute of self-disclosure was completed,
and this experimental data was used for analysis.

E. Relationship with agent

There were two levels of relationship with the agent. The
agent either conveyed that it was a competitor or that it was
a cooperative partner. The purpose of this experiment was
not to actually perform a joint task but to investigate the

Fig. 1. Flowchart of experiment.

F. Questionnaire

Fig. 2. Competitive agent

Fig. 3. Cooperative agent

change in the participant’s impression of the agent by only
presenting the type of relationship. The competing agent is
shown in Figure 2, and the cooperating agent is shown in
Figure 3. The agents in this task were introduced as learning
support agents, but the relationship is mentioned at the end
of their self-introduction. For this reason, the content of each
attribute of self-disclosure and the topic of the relationship
with the agent are independent.

In this study, we used a questionnaire related to empathy
that has been used in previous psychological studies. To mea-
sure cognitive trust, the Multi-Dimensional Measure of Trust
(MDMT) [25] was used. MDMT was developed to measure a
task partner’s reliability and competence corresponding to the
definition of cognitive trust. The participants rated how much
the partner AI fit each word (reliable, predictable, depend-
able, consistent, competent, skilled, capable, and meticulous)
on an 8-point scale (0: not at all - 7: very). Moreover,
for emotional trust, we asked participants to answer how
much the partner AI fit each word (secure, comfortable, and
content) on a 7-point scale (1: strongly disagree - 7: strongly
agree) as in the previous study [26]. In our study, we removed
the matching 0 scale of cognitive trust, bringing it to the same
7 scale as emotional trust. The trust questionnaire used in this
study was the one used by Maehigashi et al. [9].

To investigate the characteristics of empathy, we modified
the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) to be an index
for anthropomorphic agents. The main modifications were
changing the target name. In addition, the number of items
on the IRI was modified to 12; for this, items that were
not appropriate for the experiment were deleted, and similar
items were integrated. Since both of the questionnaires used
were based on IRI, a survey was conducted using a 5-point
Likert scale (1: not applicable, 5: applicable).

The questionnaire used is shown in Table I. Since Q4, Q9,
and Q10 were reversal items, the points were reversed during
analysis. Q1 to Q6 were related to affective empathy, and
Q7 to Q12 were related to cognitive empathy. Participants
answered a questionnaire after completing the task. Qet is
a questionnaire on empathy for the agent, and Qeo is a
questionnaire on the agent’s capacity for empathy.

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF QUESTIONNAIRE USED IN THIS EXPERIMENT

Qt11: Content.

Qt10: Comfortable.

Qt2: Predictable.
Qt6: Skilled.

Qt4: Consistent.
Qt8: Meticulous.

Qt3: Dependable.
Qt7: Capable.

Trust
Cognitive trust
Qt1: Reliable.
Qt5: Competent.
Emotional trust
Qt9: Secure.
Affective empathy
Personal distress
Qet1: If an emergency happens to the robot, you would be anxious and restless.
Qet2: If the robot is emotionally disturbed, you would not know what to do.
Qet3: If you see the robot in need of immediate help, you would be confused and would not know what to do.
Empathic concern
Qet4: If you see the robot in trouble, you would not feel sorry for that robot.
Qet5: If you see the robot being taken advantage of by others, you would feel like you want to protect that robot.
Qet6: The robot’s story and the events that have taken place move you strongly.
Cognitive empathy
Perspective taking
Qet7: You look at both the robot’s position and the human position.
Qet8: If you were trying to get to know the robot better, you would imagine how that robot sees things.
Qet9: When you think you’re right, you don’t listen to what the robot has to say.
Fantasy scale
Qet10: You are objective without being drawn into the robot’s story or the events taken place.
Qet11: You imagine how you would feel if the events that happened to the robot happened to you.
Qet12: You get deep into the feelings of the robot.
Affective empathy
Personal distress
Qeo1: Do you think the robot would be anxious and restless if an emergency situation happened to you?
Qeo2: Do you think the robot would not know what to do in a situation where you are emotionally involved?
Qeo3: Do you think the robot will be confused and not know what to do when it sees itself in imminent need of help?
Empathic concern
Qeo4: Do you think the robot would not feel sorry for you if it saw you in trouble?
Qeo5: Do you think the robot would feel like protecting you if it saw you being used by others for their own good?
Qeo6: Do you think the robot is strongly moved by your story and the events that took place?
Cognitive empathy
Perspective taking
Qeo7: Do you think the robot will look at both your position and the robot’s position?
Qeo8: Do you think the robot tried to get to know you better and imagined how things looked from your point of view?
Qeo9: Do you think robots won’t listen to your arguments when you seem to be right?
Fantasy scale
Qeo10: Do you think the robot is objective without being drawn into your story or the events that took place?
Qeo11: Do you think robots imagine how they would feel if the events that happened to you happened to them?
Qeo12: Do you think the robot will go deeper into your feelings?

G. Analysis method

A two-factor analysis of variance was used. ANOVA
has been frequently used in previous studies and is the
appropriate method of analysis with respect to this study.
As mentioned above, the factors among participants were
six levels of self-disclosure attributes and two levels of
relationship with the agent. On the basis of the results of
the participants’ questionnaires, we examined how the self-
disclosure attributes and relationship with the agent affected
trust and empathy toward the agent and the agent’s ability to
empathize with the participant. The trust and empathy values
tabulated in the task were used as dependent variables. The
statistical software R (ver. 4.1.0) was used for the ANOVA
and multiple comparisons in all analyses in this paper.

IV. RESULTS

In this study, cognitive and emotional trust were consid-
ered together as trust. Table II shows the mean and standard
deviation for each condition. Table III shows the results of
the analysis of variance for the three questionnaires. In this
paper, when a main effect was found, multiple comparisons
were examined for significant differences using multiple
comparison tests with Tukey’s HSD test.

The results showed that trust (Qt1-Qt11) toward the agent
was not significant. For empathy toward the agent (Qt1-
Qt12), a main effect was found for the self-disclosure at-
tribute. The results of the multiple comparisons are shown
in Figure 4. Table IV shows the mean and standard deviations
of the results of the multiple comparisons of empathy for the
agents. Among the attributes of self-disclosure, significance
was found between the job and money content. This indicates
that self-disclosure attributes affected empathy toward the
agent in some cases.

In addition, a main effect was found for the agent’s
empathy capacity (Qeo1-Qeo12) in relationship with agent.
The results of the main effect are shown in Figure 5. This
allows us to imagine that agents are more empathetic than
those who just tell people that they are in a cooperative
relationship, but not in a competitive relationship. It was
shown that people’s evaluations of the empathy capacity of
the agent were variable even before the actual collaborative
task.

V. DISCUSSION

The way to properly build a relationship between a human
and an AI agent is not only trust and empathy toward the
agent, but also proper recognition by the person of the

TABLE II
RESULTS OF PARTICIPANTS’ STATISTICAL INFORMATION

Category

Trust
(Qt1-Qt11)

Empathy
(Qet1-Qet12)

Empathy
(Qeo1-Qeo12)

Conditions
opinions and attitudes-competitive
opinions and attitudes-cooperative
hobbies-competitive
hobbies-cooperative
work-competitive
work-cooperative
opinions and attitudes-competitive
opinions and attitudes-cooperative
hobbies-competitive
hobbies-cooperative
work-competitive
work-cooperative
opinions and attitudes-competitive
opinions and attitudes-cooperative
hobbies-competitive
hobbies-cooperative
work-competitive
work-cooperative

Mean
50.83
48.55
46.94
50.02
50.96
49.36
33.96
32.98
32.32
34.02
35.43
33.13
35.47
33.81
34.57
37.55
33.57
35.64

S.D.
10.84
9.174
10.40
10.71
9.297
11.00
6.406
6.476
5.146
6.229
6.590
6.762
7.244
8.061
5.763
6.477
6.341
7.394

Conditions
money-competitive
money-cooperative
personality-competitive
personality-cooperative
body-competitive
body-cooperative
money-competitive
money-cooperative
personality-competitive
personality-cooperative
body-competitive
body-cooperative
money-competitive
money-cooperative
personality-competitive
personality-cooperative
body-competitive
body-cooperative

Mean
48.26
48.83
51.40
50.60
49.55
50.85
31.62
31.66
31.79
32.26
31.70
32.43
32.45
34.60
35.11
35.09
32.43
34.81

S.D.
9.863
10.75
10.59
8.561
8.091
8.718
6.152
5.913
6.075
6.635
6.947
6.382
6.286
6.765
7.690
7.208
6.971
6.412

TABLE III
ANALYSIS RESULTS OF ANOVA

Factor

Self-disclosure attributes
Relationship with agent
Self-disclosure attributes × Relationship with agent
Self-disclosure attributes
Relationship with agent
Self-disclosure attributes × Relationship with agent
Self-disclosure attributes
Relationship with agent
Self-disclosure attributes × Relationship with agent

F
0.9593
0.0031
0.9581
2.470
0.0113
1.158
1.778
5.106
1.554

p
0.4422 ns
0.9558 ns
0.4430 ns
0.0315 *
0.9152 ns
0.3286 ns
0.1156 ns
0.0242 *
0.1715 ns

η2
p
0.0086
0.0000
0.0086
0.0219
0.0000
0.0104
0.0158
0.0092
0.0139

Trust
(Qt1-Qt11)

Empathy
(Qet1-Qet12)

Empathy
(Qeo1-Qeo12)

p: *p<0.05

MULTIPLE COMPARISONS OF SELF-DISCLOSURE ATTRIBUTES: MEAN AND S.D.

TABLE IV

Category

Empathy
(Qet1-Qet12)

Conditions
opinions and attitudes
hobbies
work
money
personality
body

Mean
33.47
33.17
34.28
31.64
32.02
32.06

S.D.
6.425
5.747
6.740
6.002
6.331
6.644

agent’s capacity for empathy. Trust and empathy toward
agents are necessary for agents to be utilized in society.
If trust and empathy toward agents can be made constant
through appropriate approaches, humans and agents can build
a trusting relationship.

In this study, we conducted an experiment to investigate
the conditions necessary for humans to trust and empathize
with agents. We focused on the agent’s self-disclosure at-
tributes and the relationship with the agent as factors that
influence trust and empathy. The purpose of this study was
to investigate whether the attributes of self-disclosure and
the relationship with the agent can control trust and empathy
toward the agent in interactions with the agent. To this end,
four hypotheses were formulated, and the data from the
experiment were analyzed.

The results of the experiment showed that the attribute
of self-disclosure and the relationship with the agent did

not cause statistically significant changes in trust toward the
agent. H1, “Trust toward the agent changes with the attribute
of self-disclosure” was not supported. In addition, H2, “Trust
toward the agent increases when a cooperative relationship
is presented rather than a competitive relationship,” was not
also supported. One possible factor that led to this result is
that the amount of information in each of the self-disclosures
did not change, despite differences in the attributes of self-
disclosure. Regarding the relationship with the agent, it is
also possible that trust in the agent is related to the agent’s
ability as demonstrated by the agent actually performing the
task, and that simply presenting the relationship with the
agent in text messages alone, as in this study, would not be
sufficient to make a sufficient difference.

On the other hand, H3, “Empathy toward the agent
changes with the attribute of self-disclosure, but does not
change with the type of relationship presented,” supported

Fig. 4. Results of multiple comparisons on self-disclosure attributes. Red lines are medians, and circles are outliers.

of the agent in advance on the basis of their relationship
with the agent, simply by recognizing the agent’s position.
This indicated the possibility that the evaluation of the agent
is determined in advance when the person and the agent
actually interact.

A limitation of this study is that participants observed the
agent’s self-introduction by watching a video. Because the
results of this study focused on changes in the situation be-
fore an actual task, participants did not perform an actual task
with the agent. If a collaborative task had been added after
this experiment, trust in the agent could have changed, and
further changes in empathy toward the agent and the agent’s
ability to empathize with the participant could have occurred
after the task. Future research will also focus on changes in
trust and empathy after a task for both the cooperative and
competitive tasks, and we will propose a design that allows
agents used in society to develop appropriate relationships
with people.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

To establish appropriate trust and empathy relationships
with anthropomorphic agents, including AI and robots, it is
important for people to gain knowledge about the agents. An
experiment was conducted with two inter-participant factors:
the attribute of self-disclosure and the relationship with the
agent. The number of levels for each factor was six levels of
self-disclosure attributes and two levels of relationship with
the agent. The dependent variables were trust and empathy
toward the agent and the agent’s capacity for empathy. The
results showed that there were no significant differences in
trust in the agent regardless of the attribute of self-disclosure
or relationship with the agent. However, there was a main
effect of the attribute of self-disclosure on empathy toward
the agent. In addition, a main effect was found for the
agent’s ability to empathize with the participant regarding

Fig. 5. Results of main effects on relationships with agent. Red lines are
medians, and circles are outliers.

the hypothesis. The results for H3 were similar to those
obtained by Tsumura and Yamada [14], [15], and the same
results were obtained in this study. In addition, since the
agents in this study were engaged in conversation for the
purpose of supporting learning, it is possible that the content
of self-disclosure was relevant to the conversation because
the content of work was statistically significantly more
empathetic than the content of money in the self-disclosure
attribute.

Finally, H4, “The empathy capacity of the agent does not
change with the attribute of self-disclosure, but it changes
with the type of relationship presented,” supported the hy-
pothesis. The fact that this hypothesis was supported is a
strength of this study. In this experiment, the relationship
with the agent was only presented in short phrases via text
message. Nevertheless, when participants perceived the agent
as a cooperating partner, they indicated that they thought
the agent had the capacity for empathy. In other words, the
results showed that people evaluated the empathy capacity

[16] A. Paiva, I. Leite, H. Boukricha, and I. Wachsmuth, “Empathy in
virtual agents and robots: A survey,” ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst.,
vol. 7, no. 3, 2017.

[17] A. R. Rahmanti, H.-C. Yang, B. S. Bintoro, A. A. Nursetyo, M. S.
Muhtar, S. Syed-Abdul, and Y.-C. J. Li, “Slimme, a chatbot with
artificial empathy for personal weight management: System design
and finding,” Frontiers in Nutrition, vol. 9, 2022.

[18] D. A. G´omez J´auregui, F. Dollack, and M. Perusqu´ıa-Hern´andez,
“Robot mirroring: Improving well-being by fostering empathy with an
artificial agent representing the self,” in 2021 9th International Con-
ference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction Workshops
and Demos (ACIIW), 2021, pp. 1–7.

[19] W. Pan, B. Feng, V. S. Wingate, and S. Li, “What to say when
seeking support online: A comparison among different levels of self-
disclosure,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 11, 2020.

[20] M. I. Ruissen and E. R. A. de Bruijn, “Competitive game play atten-
uates self-other integration during joint task performance,” Frontiers
in Psychology, vol. 7, 2016.

[21] N. L. Collins and L. C. Miller, “Self-disclosure and liking: a meta-
analytic review,” Psychol Bull, vol. 116, no. 3, pp. 457–475, Nov.
1994.

[22] J. Meng and Y. N. Dai, “Emotional Support from AI Chatbots:
Should a Supportive Partner Self-Disclose or Not?” Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 207–222, 05
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/jcmc/zmab005
[23] R. Davis, “Web-based administration of a personality questionnaire:
Comparison with traditional methods,” Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, vol. 31, pp. 572–577, 1999.

[24] S. M. Jourard, Self-disclosure: An experimental analysis of the trans-

parent self.

John Wiley, 1971.

[25] D. Ullman and B. F. Malle, “Measuring gains and losses in
human-robot trust: Evidence for differentiable components of trust,”
in 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI), ser. 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2019, pp. 618–619. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2019.8673154

[26] S. Y. X. Komiak and I. Benbasat, “The effects of personalizaion and
familiarity on trust and adoption of recommendation agents,” MIS Q.,
vol. 30, pp. 941–960, 2006.

the relationship with the agent. These results supported our
hypothesis. This study showed that when humans perceive
the empathy capacity of the agent, simply being presented
with the agent’s relationship to the agent prior to the task
changes their evaluation of the empathy capacity of the agent.
This is an example of the importance of designing before the
actual task to be performed when using agents in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by JST, CREST (JP-
MJCR21D4), Japan. This work was also supported by
JST, the establishment of university fellowships towards the
creation of science technology innovation, Grant Number
JPMJFS2136.

REFERENCES

[1] A. D. Kaplan, T. T. Kessler, J. C. Brill, and P. A. Hancock, “Trust
intelligence: Meta-analytic findings,” Human Factors,
in artificial
vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 337–359, 2023, pMID: 34048287. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/00187208211013988

[2] T. K¨ahk¨onen, K. Blomqvist, N. Gillespie, and M. Vanhala,
“Employee trust repair: A systematic review of 20 years of empirical
research and future research directions,” Journal of Business
Research, vol. 130, pp. 98–109, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014829632100179X

[3] H. Bunting,

J. Gaskell, and G. Stoker, “Trust, mistrust and
distrust: A gendered perspective on meanings and measurements,”
Frontiers in Political Science, vol. 3, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpos.2021.642129

[4] T. Nomura, T. Kanda, H. Kidokoro, Y. Suehiro, and S. Yamada, “Why
do children abuse robots?” Interaction Studies, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 347–
369, 2016.

[5] B. L. Omdahl, Cognitive appraisal, emotion, and empathy, 1st ed.

New York: Psychology Press, 1995.

[6] S. D. Preston and F. B. M. de Waal, “Empathy: Its ultimate and
proximate bases,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 25, no. 1, p.
1–20, 2002.

[7] O. Gillath, T. Ai, M. S. Branicky, S. Keshmiri, R. B. Davison,
and R. Spaulding, “Attachment and trust in artificial intelligence,”
Computers
in Human Behavior, vol. 115, p. 106607, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S074756322030354X

[8] O. Asan, A. E. Bayrak, and A. Choudhury, “Artificial intelligence
and human trust in healthcare: Focus on clinicians,” J Med Internet
Res, vol. 22, no. 6, p. e15154, Jun 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.2196/15154

[9] A. Maehigashi, T. Tsumura, and S. Yamada, “Effects of beep-sound
interaction,” in Social
timings on trust dynamics in human-robot
Robotics, F. Cavallo, J.-J. Cabibihan, L. Fiorini, A. Sorrentino, H. He,
X. Liu, Y. Matsumoto, and S. S. Ge, Eds. Cham: Springer Nature
Switzerland, 2022, pp. 652–662.

[10] ——, “Experimental investigation of trust in anthropomorphic agents
as task partners,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Human-Agent Interaction, ser. HAI ’22. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 302–305. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3527188.3563921

[11] A. Maehigashi, “The nature of trust in communication robots: Through
comparison with trusts in other people and ai systems,” in 2022 17th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI), 2022, pp. 900–903.

[12] K. Okamura and S. Yamada, “Adaptive trust calibration for human-AI

collaboration,” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–20, 2020.

[13] ——, “Empirical evaluations of framework for adaptive trust cali-
bration in human-ai cooperation,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 220 335–
220 351, 2020.

[14] T. Tsumura and S. Yamada, “Influence of agent’s self-disclosure on
human empathy,” PLOS ONE, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1–24, 05 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283955
[15] ——, “Influence of anthropomorphic agent on human empathy through

games,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 40 412–40 429, 2023.

