Algorithm for Decentralized Cooperative
Positioning of Multiple Autonomous Agents

Milutin Pajovic, Member, IEEE, Vikrant Shah, Member, IEEE, and Philip V. Orlik, Senior Member, IEEE

1

9
1
0
2

r
a

M
4
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
7
2
6
0
.
3
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—One of the most essential prerequisites behind a
successful task execution of a team of agents is to accurately
estimate and track their poses. We consider a cooperative multi-
agent positioning problem where each agent performs single-
agent positioning until it encounters some other agent. Upon
the encounter, the two agents measure their relative pose, and
exchange particle clouds representing their poses. We propose
a cooperative positioning algorithm which fuses the received
information with the locally available measurements and infers
an agent’s pose within Bayesian framework. The algorithm is
scalable to multiple agents, has relatively low computational
complexity, admits decentralized implementation across agents,
and imposes relatively mild requirements on communication
coverage and bandwidth. The experiments indicate that the pro-
posed algorithm considerably improves single-agent positioning
accuracy, reduces the convergence time of a particle cloud and,
unlike its single-agent positioning counterpart, exhibits immunity
to an impeding feature-scarce and symmetric environment layout.

I. INTRODUCTION

Positioning is at the core of numerous applications sup-
ported by autonomous agents. It is often a challenging task,
especially in environments without Global Positioning System
(GPS) coverage and/or in setups where agents use sensors of
limited capabilities. In cooperative positioning (CP), multiple
agents cooperate with the goal to estimate their poses (i.e.,
locations and orientations) more accurately and thus meet strict
positioning accuracy requirements. As such, the CP may be
well suited for positioning of vehicles in Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITS) [1], [2], especially in environments
such as urban canyons [3] where vehicles’ cooperation is
expected to overcome issues arising from the lack of full GPS
coverage. Consequently, different cooperative schemes have
been considered to enhance GPS-based position estimates [4]–
[8]. The initial GPS locations are improved with vehicle
cooperation, realized through detection and localization of
common features using data association in [9] [10].

In another application, the CP is a critical part of cooperative
multi-agent Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM),
where agents’ cooperation provides beneﬁts such as faster
convergence and improved robustness, in addition to obtaining
more accurate estimates of the map and agents’ poses [11]. In
the robotics community, [16]–[18] exploit robot cooperation
to reduce odometry errors, [22], [23] frame the CP as a

nonlinear least squares optimization problem, while [19]–
[21] are Kalman ﬁlter-based solutions with different levels of
decentralization and communication bandwidth requirements.
Particle ﬁltering (PF) is at the core of state of the art algorithms
for single-robot positioning [12] and SLAM [13], and has
also been used for tracking multiple robots that do not make
relative pose measurements [26], as well as in multi-robot
SLAM [24], [25] where robots exchange all measurements
at each encounter.

In this paper, we propose an algorithm for cooperative
multi-agent pose estimation and experimentally validate it. The
agents in our setup perform pose estimation on their own using
PF. At an encounter, the agents detect the presence of each
other, measure relative pose between them, exchange pose
particles, and update the pose particles using the proposed
algorithm. The algorithm is built upon the Bayesian inference
framework, is implemented as a fully decentralized PF, and
has computational complexity of the order of the conventional
single-agent positioning algorithm [12]. The experimental
study shows that
the particles in the proposed algorithm
quickly converge, achieve a considerably better accuracy com-
pared to the single-agent positioning without cooperation and,
most importantly, overcome the impediments arising from a
symmetric and feature scarce experimental area. Notably, the
proposed method does not rely on GPS signals and is thus
suited for GPS-denied environments.

Among the CP algorithms, [27] and [28] are the most
relevant to our work as they build upon the PF framework
and consider the same setup. While the information fusion
in [27] is aided with the use of density trees to infer an
agent’s pose from its particles, the particle updating scheme
in [28] comprises of evaluating relative pose distribution for
all pairs of particles from two agents involved in the encounter,
which results in O(K 2) computational complexity, where
K is the number of particles. This complexity is reduced
in [29] to O(KS) by clustering K particles into S clusters.
In comparison to these works, our CP algorithm is derived
by properly abiding with the Bayesian inference principles
and the resulting particle updating scheme is optimal in the
Bayesian sense. As such, it does not employ density trees,
directly fuses information obtained at the agents’ encounter
and has linear complexity in the number of particles, i.e,
O(K).

M. Pajovic and P. V. Orlik are with the Mitsubishi Electric Research Lab-
oratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA. Email: pajovic@merl.com
V. Shah is with the Computer Engineering Department, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. This work has been performed when
he was an intern at MERL.

II. COOPERATIVE MULTI-AGENT POSITIONING

We consider a scenario where multiple agents move in an
indoor area whose map is known and made available to them.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Each agent infers its own pose until it encounters other agent.
At the encounter, the agents exchange information over a
wireless link, and each agent fuses its own estimates with the
information received from the other agent. In the following,
we ﬁrst outline a PF-based single-agent positioning algorithm
and then derive the proposed CP algorithm.

A. Single-Agent Pose Estimation

θt

yt

A pose estimation of an agent in a 2D environment is
concerned with estimating agent’s 2D coordinates (x, y) and
orientation θ with respect to the coordinate system associated
with the environment. The 2D coordinates and orientation at
time t are collected into a pose vector xt = (cid:2) xt
(cid:3)T
,
where T denotes vector/matrix transpose operator. The en-
vironment is represented with an occupancy grid map m ∈
{0, 1}N , obtained by dividing the area into N bins, such that
mi = 1 in the case the ith bin is occupied, or mi = 0, other-
wise. As the agent moves through the environment, it collects
ranging and odometry measurements. The ranging measure-
ment at time t represents distances between the agent and
obstacles seen within its ﬁeld of view. They are collected into
vector zt and probabilistically modelled as p(zt|xt, m) [30,
Ch. 6]. The odometry measurements corresponding to time
interval (t − 1, t] are collected into vector ut and modelled as
p(xt|xt−1, ut) [30, Ch. 5].

The pose estimation within Bayesian framework comprises
of inferring probability distribution of an agent’s pose xt,
given the map and all ranging and odometry measurements
up to time t,

p(xt|u1:t, z1:t, m) (cid:44) p(xt|u1, . . . , ut, z1, . . . , zt, m)

(1)

Assuming the Markov property, the inference of (1) is per-
formed sequentially using Bayes’ ﬁlter where belief about
agent’s pose at time t is updated from the belief of its pose at
time t − 1 and ranging and odometry measurements collected
between t − 1 and t [30, Ch. 8]. In most general case of
non-Gaussian noise and/or non-linear measurement models,
the Bayes’ ﬁlter is implemented as a particle ﬁlter (PF) [32],
which represents the distribution (1) with K pose particles
ˆxt,k, so that with a slight abuse of notation,

p(xt|u1:t, z1:t, m) ≈

1
K

K
(cid:88)

k=1

δ(x − ˆxt,k),

(2)

where δ(·) is the Dirac’s delta function. In the simplest im-
plementation, the PF is initialized with K particles, uniformly
sampled from the area where the agent is present. Given the
set of particles {ˆxt−1,k}K
k=1 representing the agent’s pose at
time t − 1 and odometry measurement ut, the agent motion
model p(xt|xt−1, ut) is used to sample (tentative) particles
{x(cid:48)
k is associated with a weight
wk computed from the ranging model and measurement zt,

k=1. Each tentative particle x(cid:48)

k}K

wk ∝ p(zt|x(cid:48)

k, m)

(3)

and normalized so that (cid:80)K
particles are resampled according to {wk}K
particle set {ˆxt,k}K

k=1 wk = 1. Finally, the tentative
k=1 to produce the
k=1 representing the agent’s pose at time t.

2

B. Cooperative Multi-Agent Pose Estimation

it
Each agent moves through an area on its own until
encounters some other agent, at which point both of them
cooperatively estimate/update their poses. In other words, the
CP happens at agents’ encounters. Irrespective of whether an
encounter between two agents is prearranged or occurs as a
result of their random wander, at least one agent involved
in an encounter has to be able to detect the presence of the
other one. Once the agents detect that they are in the vicinity
of each other, one (or both) measure their relative pose r,
comprised of relative range r and relative heading φ such
that r = (cid:2) r φ (cid:3)T
. There are various modalities as to how
agents encounter each other and measure their relative pose;
one experiments use one particular modality.

Assuming two agents A and B encounter each other at
is to estimate their respective poses xA
time t, our goal
t
and xB
t based on their ranging and odometry measurements
made prior to t, and their relative pose rt measured at the
moment of encounter. To aid pose estimation, we ﬁrst consider
joint probability distribution of both agents’ traversed paths,
conditioned on all measurements,

(4)

1:t− , rt)

p (cid:44) p(xA

1:t− , DB

t , xA
1:t− , zA

t , xB
1:t− = {uA

1:t−, xB
1:t− | DA
where DA
1:t− } and xA
1:t− respectively denote
measurements (odometry and ranging) and traversed path
corresponding to agent A, prior to time t. Analogous notation
DB
1:t− corresponds to agent B. We
note that an agent does not change its pose from t− to t, nor
takes odometry/ranging measurements. However its pose at t−
is estimated from DA/B
1:t− , while that at t leverages additional
information received from the encounter.

1:t−} and xB

1:t− = {uB

1:t− , zB

The joint path distribution p in (4) is using Bayes’ rule

expressed as

p ∝ p(rr|xA

t , xB

t , xA

1:t− , xB

1:t−, DA

p(xA

t , xB

t , xA

1:t− , xB

1:t− |DA

1:t− ) ×

1:t−, DB
1:t− )

1:t− , DB

(5)

Since the relative pose rt directly depends on xA
t and xB
t ,
which already contain information about poses prior to t and
odometry/ranging measurements,

p(rr|xA

t , xB

t , xA

1:t− , xB

1:t−, DA

1:t−, DB

1:t− ) = p(rr|xA

t , xB
t )

(6)
Conditioned on odometry/ranging measurements, agents’
paths are independent of each other and hence the second
term on the right side of (5) factorizes as

p(xA
p(xA

1:t− , xB

t , xB
t , xA

t , xA
1:t−|DA

1:t− |DA
1:t− ) p(xB

1:t− , DB
t , xB

1:t− ) =
1:t− )

1:t− |DB

(7)

Recalling that an agent does not move nor takes ranging
measurements between t− and t, the path distribution of agent
A is computed as

p(xA

t , xA

1:t− |DA

1:t− ) = p(xA
= δ(xA

t |xA
t − xA

t− ) p(xA

t− ) p(xA

1:t−|DA

1:t− )
1:t− |DA

1:t−) (8)

The path distribution corresponding to agent B is ob-
tained analogously. Substituting the resulting expression along

with (8) into (7), and thus obtained expression and (6) into (5)
yields

p ∝ p(rt|xA

t ) δ(xA

t , xB
1:t− |DA

t − xA
1:t− ) p(xB

t− ) δ(xB
1:t−|DB

t − xB
1:t− )

p(xA

t− ) ×

(9)

A sequential inference of agents’ paths is performed with
particle ﬁlter (PF), directly derived from (9). Namely, the
agents’ path particles up to time t are sampled from proposal
distribution deﬁned as

t − xA

t − xB

1:t− |DA

1:t−|DB

q = δ(xA

t− ) δ(xB

t−) p(xA

1:t− ) p(xB

t−,k}K

1:t− |DA

1:t−|DA

k=1 and {ˆxB

1:t− )
(10)
Thus, pose particles ˆxA
t,k and ˆxB
t,k of the two agents at time t
are obtained from the respective path posteriors p(xA
1:t− )
and p(xB
1:t− ). Each path posterior is represented with
its own set of pose particles, evaluated using single-agent
positioning algorithm outlined in Section II-A such that the
time t− are
agents’ particles representing their poses at
t−,k}K
{ˆxA
k=1, where we assume without loss
of generality that both agents use the same number of particles
K. Therefore, ˆxA
t,k are independently sampled from
{ˆxA
k=1 with sampling distributions de-
ﬁned by the associated weights {wA
k=1,
respectively. In the case single-agent positioning algorithm
resamples particles before each update step, the sampling dis-
tributions are uniform. The weight associated to the sampled
pair of agents’ pose particles, ˆxA
t,k, is given as the
ratio between the target p and proposal distribution q such
that [14], [15]

t,k and ˆxB
t−,k}K

k=1 and {ˆxB

k=1 and {wB

t,k and ˆxB

t−,k}K

t−,k}K

t−,k}K

wk =

p
q

∝ p(rt|ˆxA

t,k, ˆxB

t,k)

(11)

Once K pose particle pairs are sampled (so as to keep the
number of particles unchanged), their weights are normalized
so that (cid:80)K
k=1 wk = 1. Upon resampling pose particle pairs
according to {wk}K
k=1, the resulting particles fuse all available
measurements and represent agents’ pose distributions upon
their encounter.

The described approach for updating agents’ pose particles
at the encounter naturally admits a decentralized implemen-
tation across agents. Speciﬁcally, each agent performs a PF-
based single-agent positioning using its odometry and ranging
measurements until it comes relatively close to some other
agent. At an encounter, the agents detect presence of each
other, measure their relative pose and exchange their most
recent pose particle sets. Each agent then updates its pose
particle set on its own, using its particle set prior to the
encounter, received particle set of the other agent and the
relative pose measurement. It then continues to move in the
area and perform single-agent positioning,
initialized with
the updated particle set. The pseudo-code of the proposed
algorithm implemented on agent A is given in Algorithm 1.
The implementation for the other agent is analogous.

In addition to admitting decentralized implementation, the
proposed algorithm has some other favorable features. First,
it is derived within the Bayesian inference framework and
thus the particle updating scheme is optimal in the Bayesian
sense. Second, the computational complexity of the update

Algorithm 1 Proposed algorithm implementation on Agent A

3

t−,k}K

k=1, X B = {ˆxB

1: Inputs: X A = {ˆxA
2: Inputs: Measurement of the agents’ relative pose rt
3: Initialize ˜X A = A = ∅
4: for k = 1 : K do
5:

t−,k}K

k=1

6:

7:

Uniformly sample ˜xA
Uniformly sample ˜xB
Compute wk ∝ p(rt | ˜xA
Update A = A ∪ {(˜xA

t,k ∼ X A
t,k ∼ X B
t,k, ˜xB
t,k, wk)}

t,k)

(cid:80)K

8:
9: Normalize wk ← wk
10: for l = 1 : K do
11:
12:
13: return ˜X A

Draw i with probability wi
Update ˜X A = ˜X A ∪ ˜xA
t,i

k=1 wk

step comprises of evaluating weights for pose particle pairs and
is no larger than an update step in a conventional single-agent
positioning. Third, the agents exchange their pose particles at
the encounter, occurring when they are in the vicinity of each
other, implying relatively mild requirements for communica-
tion bandwidth and coverage. Fourth, the algorithm seamlessly
supports heterogeneous agents employing sensors of different
capabilities. Speciﬁcally, as the above mathematical derivation
suggests, an agent does not need any information about
other agent’s platform and/or sensors because this information
is already implicitly contained in pose particles it receives
from that agent. Fifth,
the algorithm is scalable to more
that two agents over their multiple encounters. Namely, an
agent performs pose particle update using Algorithm 1 at
each encounter with any other agent. Sixth, the derived algo-
rithm holds regardless of the type of measurements used for
single-agent positioning, as long as the poses are represented
with particle clouds. Finally, the performance beneﬁts of the
proposed algorithm are experimentally validated, which is
described in the following part.

III. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
We use two open source Turtlebot platforms1 shown in
Fig. 1a for the experimental validation. These robots, equipped
with full odometry and RGBD sensors, provide odometry ut
and ranging measurements zt, where the measurement models
are from [30, Ch 5 and 6]. To enable cooperation, robot A has
a rigidly attached 3 × 3 checkerboard pattern to its body so
that robot B can detect it based on the optical images from
the RGBD sensor. Upon detecting presence of robot A, robot
B performs relative pose measurement in two steps. First, the
location of the center of the checkerboard pattern is obtained
from the point cloud created from the depth measurements
of the RGBD sensor. Then, the relative pose is estimated by
extracting the point cloud of the checkerboard corners and
estimating the surface normal using OpenPCL [31]. Robot B
then sends the relative pose measurement to robot A and the
two robots exchange their pose particles. As justiﬁed in [27]
and used in [28], [29], we assume the measurement errors

1https://www.turtlebot.com

4

(a) Robots (left: A, right: B)

(b) Robot A prior to the encounter

(c) Robot B prior to the encounter

(d) Experimental setup

(e) Robot A upon the encounter

(f) Robot B upon the encounter

Fig. 1: Experimental robots, setup and pose particles of robots A and B prior and upon their encounter in one experiment.

of the relative distance r and heading θ are independent
and zero-mean Gaussian distributed with standard deviations
σr = 0.1 m and σφ = 10o, selected based on test results of
the described relative pose estimation pipeline.

An occupancy grid map of the experimental area with
2.5 cm cell resolution is available to both robots. As shown
in Fig. 1d, robot B is stationary and robot A moves along
a corridor such that they meet when robot A passes by the
cubicle where robot B is located. The pose particles of robot
B are prior to the encounter with robot A shown in Fig. 1c.
Since robot A has no prior knowledge of its initial pose, its
particles have not yet converged by the time the robots meet, as
shown in Fig. 1b. However, even in such a case where robots
have little knowledge of their poses prior to the encounter, the
information fusion happening at the encounter according to the
proposed algorithm results in updated particles that are fairly
conﬁned around the true poses of the corresponding robots, as
shown in Figs 1e and 1f.

The proposed algorithm is benchmarked against a single-
agent positioning algorithm [12], conventionally used in
robotics. Overall, the two algorithms perform global position-
ing of robot A, and are run synchronously over the same
measurements. The ground truth positions of robot A are esti-
mated from averaging pose particles resulting from running yet
another instance of the conventional single-agent positioning
algorithm, initialized with the correct starting position of robot
A and whose ranging measurements are provided by a high-
resolution lidar. The comparison of how positioning error of
the two algorithms evolve over time across ten independent
experimental runs is shown in Fig. 2. As shown, the error
corresponding to the proposed algorithm drops and stays
below 0.2 m (and in most cases below 0.1 m) as soon as the
robots meet in all ten experimental runs. Not surprisingly, the
encounters in different runs happen at different time instants.
The shown results validate that the proposed algorithm yields
better error performance and faster convergence of particles,
compared to the single-agent positioning case. In addition, due

Fig. 2: Positioning errors across ten experimental runs.

to a symmetry in the experimental area around the vertical axis
passing through the middle of the area, the error corresponding
to the single-agent positioning algorithm increases, indicating
that the particles diverge after robot A passes by the cubicle
where robot B is located. In contrast, the proposed algorithm
is immune to this symmetry and is able to accurately track
robot B as it moves down the second half of its route.

IV. CONCLUSION
We describe an algorithm for cooperative positioning of
multiple agents. The proposed algorithm has a relatively mild
communication bandwidth and coverage requirements, and is
implemented as a fully decentralized particle ﬁlter with the
same complexity as a single-agent positioning method. The
experiments conﬁrm better accuracy and faster convergence
compared to the case when agents do not cooperate, and
show its immunity to a symmetric area where a single-agent
positioning fails.

5

[22] S. Safavi and U. Khan, “An Opportunistic Linear Convex Algorithm for
Localization in Mobile Robot Networks”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 33, no. 4, Aug. 2017.

[23] A. Franchi, G. Oriolo and P. Stegagno, “Mutual localization in multi-
robot systems using anonymous relative measurements”, The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1302–1322,
2013.

[24] L. Carlone, M. K. Ng, J. Du, B. Bona, and M. Indri, “Rao-Blackwellized
Particle Filters Multi Robot SLAM with Unknown Initial Correspon-
dences and Limited Communication”, In Proc. of the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 243–249, May 2010.
[25] A. Howard, “Multi-robot Simultaneous Localization and Mapping using
Particle Filters”, The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 25,
no. 12, pp. 1243-1256, Dec. 2006.

[26] A. Ahmad, G. Lawless and P. Lima, “An Online Scalable Approach to
Uniﬁed Multirobot Cooperative Localization and Object Tracking”, IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1184–1199, Oct. 2017.
[27] D. Fox, W. Burgard, H. Kruppa and S. Thrun, “A Probabilistic Approach
to Collaborative Multi-Robot Localization”, Autonomous Robots, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 325–344, Jun 2000.

[28] A. Prorok and A. Martinoli, “A reciprocal sampling algorithm for
lightweight distributed multi-robot localization”, In Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
3241–3247, 2011.

[29] A. Prorok, A. Bahr and A. Martinoli, “Low-cost collaborative lo-
calization for large-scale multi-robot systems”, In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4236-4241, 2012.
[30] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, “Probabilistic Robotics (Intelligent

Robotics and Autonomous Agents)”, The MIT Press, 2005.

[31] R. B. Rusu and S. Cousins, “3D is here: Point Cloud Library (PCL)”, In
Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), May 2011.

[32] B. Ristic, S. Arulampalm and N. Gordon, “Beyond the Kalman ﬁlter :

particle ﬁlters for tracking applications”, Artech House, 2004.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Chen and C. Englund, “Cooperative ITS - EU Standards to Accelerate
Cooperative Mobility”, International Conference on Connected Vehicles
and Expo (IC-CVE), Nov. 2014, pp. 681-686.

[2] K. Sjoberg, P. Andres, T. Buburuzan and A. Brakemeier, “Cooperative
Intelligent Transport Systems in Europe: Current Deployment Status and
Outlook,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 89-97,
Jun. 2017.

[3] E. F. N. A. Boukerche, H. A. B. F. Oliveira and A. A. Loureiro, “Vehicular
Ad Hoc Networks: A New Challenge for Localization-Based Systems,”
Computer Communications, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2838-2849, Jul. 2008.
[4] M. Rohani, D. Gingras, V. Vigneron and D. Gruyer, “A New Decentral-
ized Bayesian Approach for Cooperative Vehicle Localization Based on
Fusion of GPS and VANET Based Inter-Vehicle Distance Measurement”,
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 85-
95, Apr. 2015.

[5] R. Parker and S. Valaee, “Vehicular Node Localization Using Received-
Signal-Strength Indicator”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 3371-3380, Nov. 2007.

[6] G. Soatti, M. Nicoli, S. Savazzi and U. Spagnolini, “Consensus-Based
Algorithms for Distributed Network-State Estimation and Localization”,
IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 430-444, Jun. 2017.

[7] H. Wymeersch, J. Lien and M. Z. Win, “Cooperative Localization in
Wireless Networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 427-
450, Feb. 2009.

[8] N. Alam, A. T. Balaei and A. G. Dempster, “A DSRC Doppler-Based
Cooperative Positioning Enhancement for Vehicular Networks With GPS
Availability”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, no. 9,
pp. 4462-4470, Nov. 2011.

[9] G. Soatti, M. Nicoli, N. Garcia, B. Denis, R. Raulefs and H. Wymeer-
sch,“Implicit Cooperative Positioning in Vehicular Networks”, IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2018.

[10] M. Brambilla, G. Soatti and M. Nicoli, “Precise Vehicle Positioning by
Cooperative Feature Association and Tracking in Vehicular Networks,”
2018 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP), Freiburg, 2018,
pp. 648-652.

[11] S. Saeedi, M. Trentini, M. Seto and H. Li, “Multiple-robot Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping: A review”, Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 33,
no. 1, pp. 3–46, Jan. 2016.

[12] D. Fox, “Adapting the Sample Size in Particle Filters through KLD-
sampling”, International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 22, no. 12,
pp. 985–1003, Dec. 2003.

[13] G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss and W. Burgard, “Improved Techniques for Grid
Mapping with Rao-Blackwellized Particle Filters”, IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34–46, Feb. 2007.

[14] P. M. Djuric, J. H. Kotecha, J. Zhang, Y. Huang, T. Ghirmai, M. F.
Bugallo and J. Miguez, “Particle Filtering”, IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 19–38, Sept. 2003.

[15] M. S. Arulampalam, S. Maskell, N. Gordon and T. Clapp, “A tutorial
on particle ﬁlters for online nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian tracking”,
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 174–188,
Feb. 2002.

[16] J. Borenstein, “Control and kinematic design of multi-degree-of-freedom
linkage”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and

robots with compliant
Automation, 1995.

[17] R. Kurazume and N. Shigemi, “Cooperative positioning with multiple
robots”, In Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 1994.

[18] I. M. Rekleitis, G. Dudek, and E. Milios, “Multi-robot exploration of an
unknown environment, efﬁciently reducing the odometry error”, In Proc.
of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
1997.

[19] S. I. Roumeliotis and G. A. Bekey, “Distributed multirobot localization”,
In Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 781–795,
2002.

[20] E. D. Nerurkar, S. I. Roumeliotis and A. Martinelli, “Distributed maxi-
mum a posteriori estimation for multi-robot cooperative localization”, In
Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 1402–1409, May 2009.

[21] L. C. Carrillo-Arce, E. D. Nerurkar, J. L. Gordillo and S. I. Roumeliotis,
“Decentralized multi-robot cooperative localization using covariance in-
tersection”, In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 1412–1417, 2013.

