1
2
0
2

t
c
O
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
8
0
4
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Author note:This is a preprint. The final article is published in “The Handbook on Socially Interactive Agents” by ACM books.Citation information: McDonnell, R., and Mutlu, B. (2021) Appearance. In B. Lugrin, C. Pelachaud, D. Traum(Eds.), Handbook on Socially Interactive Agents –20 Years of Research on Embodied Conversational Agents, Intelligent Virtual Agents, and Social Robotics, Volume 1: Methods, Behavior, Cognition (pp. 107-146). ACM books.DOI of the final chapter: 10.1145/3477322.3477327DOI of volume 1 of the handbook: 10.1145/3477322   AppearanceRachel McDonnell and Bilge Mutlu                                       Correspondence concerning this chapter should be addressed to Rachel McDonnell & Bilge Mutlu, ramcdonn@scss.tcd.ie, bilge@cs.wisc.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Appearance

Rachel McDonnell, Bilge Mutlu

1.1 Why appearance?

One might question why we need appearance for the metaphor to work, as voice assistants
can effectively express characteristics of a metaphor solely through behavior. We argue that,
although disembodied agents can effectively serve as computer-based assistants in speciﬁc
scenarios of use, for example, involving driving and visually impaired users, appearance
provides a “locus of attention” [Cassell 2001] for the cognitive and interactive faculties of the
user of the system. Additionally, human communication mechanisms, such as mutual gaze,
turn-taking, body orientation, necessitate the presence of appropriate visual cues to properly
function, making appearance a necessity for agent design. Studies of human-human, human-
agent, and human-robot interaction provide strong evidence that such mechanisms work
more effectively when parties provide appearance-based cues. The mere presence of a form
of embodiment in interacting with an agent improves social outcomes, such as motivation
[Mumm and Mutlu 2011]. As the scale and modality of appearance get closer to that of
the metaphor, these outcomes further improve; human-scale and physical agents have more
perceived presence [Kiesler et al. 2008] and persuasive ability [Bainbridge et al. 2011] than
scaled-down and virtual agents.

1.2 History

Agents with virtual and physical embodiments follow different historical trajectories. Virtual
agents, also called embodied conversational agents, a term coined by Cassell [2000], are
“computer-generated cartoonlike characters that demonstrate many of the same properties
as humans in face-to-face conversation, including the ability to produce and respond to
verbal and nonverbal communication.” Early visions for virtual agents involved characters
involved re-played recordings of human performers, such as the intelligent personal agent
included in the Knowledge Navigator concept developed by Apple in 1987 [Colligan 2011
(accessed June 30, 2020] (Figure 1.1). First implementations of virtual agents were stylized
nonhuman or human characters that were generated through 3D modeling and rendering
and were embedded within virtual environments. An example of early nonhuman characters
included Herman the Bug, an animated pedagogical agent embedded within a virtual learning
environment [Lester et al. 1997]. Another early example is Rea, a real-estate agent that
followed a stylized humanlike design and appeared within a simulated home environment

1

1.2 History 2

Figure 1.1 Early examples of virtual embodiments. Left: The Rea real-estate agent [Cassell 2000]; Right:

the personal assistant envisioned for Knowledge Navigator [Sculley 1989].

[Cassell 2000]. Although these examples represent agents that are controlled and visualized
by computer systems, the design of such nonhuman and human characters have a long history
in shadow puppetry, dating back to the ﬁrst millennium BC [Orr 1974]. These characters were
designed for storytelling and entertainment, and the character designs reﬂected historical or
cultural ﬁgures as well as characters developed with backstories. The design of the characters
also include stylizations and ornamentations that reﬂect their ethnic and cultural context, such
as the character Karag¨oz that followed a stylized human design with clothing and storyline
from the 16-19th century Ottoman Empire [Scarce 1983].

The design of agents with robotic embodiments date back to mechanical humanoid au-
tomata designed as early as the 10th century BC [Hamet and Tremblay 2017]. As did with

Figure 1.2 Early physical agents. Left: Mechanical Turk automata by Joseph Racknitz (1789), image
courtesy of Humboldt University Library; Right: a tea-serving Karakuri puppet, Karakuri
ningyo (c) 2016 Donostia/San Sebastian.

1.2 History 3

virtual characters and shadow puppetry, the physical appearance of these early automata also
followed stylized humanlike forms. Examples, shown in Figure 1.2, include the design of the
Mechanical Turk, a covertly human-controlled chess-playing machine that integrated a hu-
manoid chess player on a wooden chest where the human operator hid [Simon et al. 1999].
Karakuri puppets, mechanical automata designed in the 17-19th century Japan to be used, for
example, to ceremonially serve tea, followed a stylized humanlike appearance and traditional
Japanese clothing [Yokota 2009]. Although the appearance of robotic agents has overwhelm-
ingly followed a human form with some level of stylization, robotic agents also commonly fol-
low nonhuman morphologies. Examples of nonhuman appearances include the doglike robot
Aibo designed by Sony in 1999 [Pransky 2001], a robotic seal designed for therapy in assisted
living settings [Wada et al. 2005], and Keepon, a robot whose appearance resembled that of a
chick [Kozima et al. 2009]. Finally, robots have also been envisioned as cartoonish characters
that blend features from different sources, such as the design of the WALL·E robot by Pixar,
a trash compactor with features that suggested humanlike eyes and arms [Whitley 2012].

In the 1960s, the ﬁeld of computer graphics and animation started to gain momentum, and
by the 1970s most of the building blocks of 3D computer animation were laid, such as surface
shading by Gouraud [1971] and Phong [1975] and texture mapping by Catmull [1974]. It
was not long until computer generated characters began to appear in feature-ﬁlms such as
Futureworld (1979, Richard T. Heffron), which was ﬁrst to showcase a computer animated
hand and face, with both wireframe and 3D shading, while the well-known ﬁlm Tron (1982,
Steven Lisberger) followed soon after with a whole 15 minutes of computer generated content.
Fully animated characters also started to appear in other areas such as music videos (e.g., Mick
Jagger’s Hard Woman).

Ten years later, the technology was developed even further and adopted in ﬁlms such as
Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991, James Cameron) The Lawnmower Man (1992, Brett
Leonard), and Jurassic Park (1993, Steven Spielberg). This was the start of 3D animation
receiving a widespread commercial success and it was not long until Pixar Animation Studios
released the ﬁrst entirely computer-animated feature-length ﬁlm Toy Story (1995, John Las-
seter). Toy Story was a massive success, largely due to the use of appealing cartoon-characters
with plastic appearance, which computer graphics shading was perfectly suited to at that time.
In the 2000s, more technology was being developed to support the growing industry and
Pixar’s Monsters Inc. (2001, Pete Docter) showed impressive results with simulated fur de-
picting the subtle secondary motion on the coats of the monster characters. The Lord of the
Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001, Peter Jackson) pushed new boundaries with realistic
crowd simulation, while in the same year Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (2001, Hironobu
Sakaguchi) attempted to create the ﬁrst photo-realistic virtual humans. While the near-lifelike
appearance of the characters in the ﬁlm was well received, some commentators felt the char-
acter renderings appeared unintentionally creepy. Films The Polar Express (2004, Robert Ze-
meckis) and Beowulf (2007, Robert Zemeckis) marked further milestones in photorealism, but

1.2 History 4

again received poor audience reactions. Photorealistic rendering was used more successfully
for fantasy creatures such as the character Gollum from The Lord of the Rings: The Fellow-
ship of the Ring, the ﬁrst full CGI character in a live-action movie. The actor that drove the
movements of Gollum (Andy Serkis) even went on to win the ﬁrst performance-capture Oscar
for his acting in later ﬁlms. Similar success was achieved with the photorealistic fantasy Navi
characters in Avatar (2009, James Cameron).

More recent advancements in 3D scanning, Deep learning, and performance capture have
allowed actors to play realistic-depictions of their younger selves (Bladerunner 2049 (2017,
Denis Villeneuve), The Irishman (2019, Martin Scorsese), Gemini Man (2019, Ang Lee)) or
even to play virtual roles after they have passed-away (Peter Cushing in Star Wars: Rogue one
(2017, Gareth Edwards) and Paul Walker Fast and Furious 7 (2015, James Wan)).

In the 1980 and 90s, there was also a shift towards interactive media such as games, where
real-time animation was employed. This posed new challenges for character creation due to
the additional requirements of character responsiveness and agency.

Game characters were thus less visually complex than ﬁlm characters of the time due
to the higher computation cost. The ﬁrst attempts in the 1980s were in the form of simple
2D sprites such as Pac-Man (Namco), Sonic the Hedgehog (Sega), and Mario (Nintendo).
With the advent of home console systems and consumer-level graphics processing units, there
was a shift from 2D to 3D in games such as Quake, The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time,
Tomb Raider, and Star Wars Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II. Characters started to appear more
sophisticated and used texture mapping techniques for materials and linear blend skinning for
animation.

In the 2000s, many games utilized cut scenes of cinematic sequences which could achieve
higher photo-realism and conversation while disabling the interactive element of the game
(e.g., LA Noire, Heavy Rain, etc.). Nowadays, with real-time raytracing available in game
engines, there is no longer a need for photorealism to be restricted to cut-scenes, and we are
seeing incredibly realistic depictions of humans and environments in real-time (e.g., Detroit:
Become Human and Hellblade: Senua’s Sacriﬁce).

Throughout the years, the graphics and game components have developed rapidly, allowing
progressively more realistic depictions every year, though characters with advanced facial
animation and conversational capabilities are rarely seen. In commercial games, conversing
with non-player characters (NPCs) is usually achieved by selecting predeﬁned conversation
texts on the screen, to progress the conversation. There is scope in the future for truly
conversational NPCs. Additionally, as virtual reality becomes ever more immersive, we could
be about to see the next evolution for the media with higher levels of realism, conversational
capabilities and social presence with NPCs.

1.3 Design

1.3.1 What is appearance?

1.3 Design 5

When we say “appearance” for agents, we refer to the virtual or physical embodiment that
users can experience using their visual faculties. Most agents, from simple static visual repre-
sentations that accompany chatbots to human surrogates, follow a metaphoric design, that is,
the design of the agent takes inspiration or reference from a familiar an existing or envisioned
biological entity (e.g., a human, a dog, a grasshopper) or hybrid entity (e.g., a “trash can”
in appearance, but a cartoonish human in behavior). The expression of a metaphor involves
two key dimensions: appearance and behavior. Metaphoric designs can follow consistent or
inconsistent implementations across these two dimensions. For example, an agent that follows
the metaphor of a dog and appears and behaves like a dog involves a consistent implementa-
tion, whereas a dog that speaks involves an inconsistent implementation, integrating dog-like
appearance with human-like behavior. The power of agents as a family of computer interfaces
comes from metaphoric design, which jumpstarts user mental models and expectations of the
system using a familiar representation. For example, a computer system that uses speech as
the mode of user interaction and follows a humanlike agent metaphor signals to the user that
the system is capable of human mechanisms of communication, such as speech. Similarly, a
robot designed to follow the metaphor of a maid or a butler is expected to be competent in
household work.

A common approach to designing the appearance of agents is metaphorical design, where
the design follows a well-known metaphor to elicit familiarity and jumpstart user mental
models of the agent’s capabilities. For example, a virtual agent designed to review hospital
discharge procedures with patients followed the metaphor of a nurse, appearing on the screen
as a nurse in scrubs [Bickmore et al. 2009]. The design of most agents follow a singular
metaphor, such as the ASIMO humanoid robot designed to appear as an astronaut wearing
a spacesuit [Sakagami et al. 2002], although some designs blend multiple metaphors [Deng
et al. 2019], such as the MiRo robot, which integrates multiple animal features chosen to
improve perceptions of its friendliness and feelings of companionship [Prescott et al. 2017].
Metaphorical design provides not only morphological features for the design of the agent, but
it also provides additional behavioral and physical features such as clothing and environmental
context to further support the expression of the metaphor. An example of such features is the
design of Valerie the Roboceptionist, a receptionist robot situated in a receptionist’s cubicle,
equipped with a backstory that was consistent with the design of the character, and dressed
in clothing that was consistent with the backstory and the metaphor that the agent’s design
followed [Gockley et al. 2005]. Figure 1.3 illustrates examples of metaphorical design: the
Paro, the Keepon and the iCat robots that followed the metaphors of a seal, a chick and a cat,
respectively.

1.3 Design 6

Figure 1.3 Example metaphors used in the design of robotic agents. Left to right: PARO Therapeutic
Robot (c) 2014 PARO Robots U.S.; the Keepon robot that followed the metaphor of a chick
(c) 2007 BeatBots LLC, [Kozima et al. 2009]; the iCat robot designed to follow the metaphor
of a cat [van Breemen et al. 2005].

Virtual agents are also designed to follow different metaphors, most frequently of instruc-
tors or experts. For example, a digital double replica of a real doctor [Dai and MacDorman
2018] was found to be effective at delivering cues of warmth and competence (Figure 1.4).
More importantly, the virtual doctor’s recommendations also signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the de-
cisions of participants in the same manner as the real doctor, implying effectiveness at persua-
sion.

In an educational context, a study on learning outcomes found that a human lecturer is
preferable, but that robotic and virtual agents may be viable alternatives if designed properly
[Li et al. 2016]. It was also shown that having a stereotypically knowledgeable appearance of
the pedagogical agent inﬂuenced learning [Veletsianos 2010].

Virtual agents have also been used extensively as assistants. For example, as a navigation
assistant in a crash-landing scenario in a study by Torre et al. [2018, 2019], where they had
to persuade participants to accept their recommendations about items required for survival.
Participants explicitly preferred interacting with a cartoon-like agent than a photorealistic
one, and were more inclined to accept the cartoon-agents suggestions. Note that the photo-
realistic agent was rated low on attractiveness, and since persuasion and attractiveness have
been linked in previous work (e.g., Suzanne R. Pallak and Koch [1983]) it may be the case
that a more attractive virtual human may have been more persuasive.

Another study compared digital avatars, humans and humanoid robots to determine the
inﬂuence of appearance on trust and identifying expert advice [Pan and Steed 2016]. They
found that participants were less likely to choose advice from the avatar, irrespective of
whether or not the avatar was an expert. In contrast, experts represented by the robot or by a
real person were identiﬁed reliably.

1.3 Design 7

Figure 1.4 An example of agent design by replicating human experts [Dai and MacDorman 2018].

1.3.2 Modalities

Appearance can be expressed in graphical, virtual, video-mediated, physical, and hybrid
modalities (Figure 1.5). Agents in graphical modalities are static or dynamic two-dimensional
representations, such as a photo, drawing, or animation of a character. For example, “Laura,”
a virtual nurse designed to support low-literacy patients appeared as a two-dimensional
rendering [Bickmore et al. 2009]. Virtual embodiments usually involve three-dimensional
simulations that are rendered in real time or replays of rendered animations. An example
virtual embodiment is MACH, a virtual interview coach that is rendered in real-time in
a virtual environment and presented on a two-dimensional display [Hoque et al. 2013].
Such representations can also be presented in virtual-reality and mixed-reality modalities
[Garau et al. 2005], which provide the user with a more immersive experience of the agent’s
embodiment. Agents with a physical appearance involve a robotic embodiment, such as the
Robovie robot designed as a shopping mall assistant [Iwamura et al. 2011] or the Geminoid
designed to serve as a human surrogate [Nishio et al. 2007]. Users of agents with physical
embodiments can also experience the appearance of the agent over video [Kiesler et al. 2008].

DepictionCharacterLow RealismHigh RealismHigh WarmthLow Warmth1.3 Design 8

Figure 1.5 Modalities in which agents are expressed. Left to right, top to bottom: the nurse agent Laura

rendered as a graphical agent [Bickmore et al. 2009]; the MACH virtual interview coach
[Hoque et al. 2013]; the hybrid robot Spritebot with a physical body and a graphical face
[Deng et al. 2019]; the hybrid FurHat robot with a physical head and a projected face (c)
2021 Furhat Robotics; the Pepper physical robot (c) 2021 SoftBank Robotics; the Geminoid
F android robot [Watanabe et al. 2015].

Finally, hybrid embodiments bring physical and graphical or virtual features together, such
as a graphical face appearing on a physical body or graphical features that are projected
on the surface of a physical body. Example of hybrid appearances include the FurHat robot
[Al Moubayed et al. 2012] or Valerie/Tank, a receptionist robot [Lee et al. 2010].

The modality in which an agent is presented affects user perceptions of and experience
with the agent. A large body of literature has aimed to compare interaction outcomes across
different modalities toward testing the “embodiment hypothesis:” that physical embodiment
has a measurable effect on user performance and perceptions in interactions with an agent.
This body of work shows that, in general, users respond more favorably to agents with
stronger embodiments and human-scale sizes. In this context, “strong” embodiment refers
to modalities that elicit a strong sense of presence, such as physical or hybrid modalities, and
“weak” embodiment describes modalities such as graphical or virtual that may not elicit a
sense of presence at such an extent. Deng et al. [2019] systematically analyzed 65 studies
that compared virtual and physical agents in measures of perceptions of the agent and task
performance. The analysis showed that 78.5% of these studies involved improvements in
at least one of these categories of measures, consistent with the embodiment hypothesis,
15.4% involved no change, and 6.1% involved worsening in at least one of the categories of

1.3 Design 9

measures. Among the studies included in this analysis, the most comprehensive comparison
was performed by Kiesler et al. [2008], who compared a collocated robot, a lifesize video
projection of a remote robot, a lifesize projection of the virtual version of the robot, and the
virtual robot on a computer screen. The measured interaction outcomes generally decreased
in this order, the participants responding to the robot more favorably than the virtual agent
and the collocated robot more than the projected robot.

The modality in which the agent is presented not only affects user interaction with the
agent, but it also presents different sets of affordances. For example, even if the behaviors of
a virtual character and a physical robot are controlled by the same algorithm, the behaviors
demonstrated by the agents might look very different due to the differences inherent in the
modalities. Unlike virtual characters, physical robots are subject to mechanical limitations
and bound by the physical properties of the real world, which might affect the speed with
which the agent displays a desired behavior (unbounded in virtual characters, bounded
by actuator performance in robots), the sounds that the agent makes (e.g., sound artifacts
produced by robots executing motion), the detail with which agent features can be fabricated
(bound by modeling and rendering limitations in virtual characters and by physical fabrication
limitations in robots), and so on. Physical robots and hybrid agents afford touch interactions
and offer texture and material hardness as additional cues. The scale in which the agent
is presented is another factor that affects affordances and interaction outcomes. Across all
modalities, the closer the agent is presented to human scale, the more likely the agent will
support human communication mechanisms. For example, a robot that is expected to be
hugged by users must have a size that affords hugging.

1.3.3 Agent Construction

An important factor that shapes agent appearance is how agents are constructed, which due to
historical as well as practical reasons varies based on the modality of the agent. For example,
physical agents are constructed using processes and practices from industrial design, and
their designs are affected by factors such as manufacturing limitations, product safety, and
material choice. On the other hand, the construction of virtual characters borrows processes
and practices from animated ﬁlmmaking and game design, and their designs are affected by
factors including character backstory, the environment in which the agent will be presented,
and the mechanisms with which the agent interacts with its environment, the user, and the
user’s environment. The paragraphs below outline some of these processes and practices.

1.3.3.1 Construction of virtual characters

Virtual characters have fewer constraints in terms of design than robots, and can be pro-
grammed to take on a multitude of different appearances, using a variety of modelling, and
rendering techniques. For modelling, virtual characters are typically visualised in 3D using
a mesh of consecutive planar polygons which approximate the surface of the human’s body.

1.3 Design 10

Polygons are very simple building blocks, and so can be used to describe many different
shapes. They are also very quick to render on graphics hardware. The construction of 3D mod-
els is an established industry with many sophisticated packages available for model-building
(e.g., 3D Studio Max, Maya, Blender, Houdini, etc.). Creating detailed 3D virtual characters
using these packages is a highly skilled and labour-intensive task primarily due to the fact
that 3D models are created using a 2D display and a high level of geometric detail is required
to create convincing virtual characters. Generating 3D data for virtual characters can also be
accomplished by scanning real people using a range of techniques such as photogrammetry,
structured light scanning or laser scanning. Photogrammetry is a type of scanning whereby
a collection of still photographs from regular DSLR cameras taken from various angles is
all that is required to create a 3D model. Software then analyzes the photographs, matching
characteristic points of the object on the images. This creates a point cloud of vertices which
can later be converted into a mesh. It is the most commonly used tool nowadays for scanning
humans in the visual effects industry, where the number and quality of cameras used in the rig
contribute to the accuracy of the recovered mesh.

3D scanning can also be performed using sophisticated 3D scanning devices to project
structured patterns of light or lasers onto the surface of the human to reproduce a 3D model
that is a copy of the original.

For more stylized characters, artists can sculpt characters out of clay and then use one of

the mentioned forms of 3D scanning to gather the data onto the computer.

Professional grade 3D scanners are expensive, but

there are also more affordable,
consumer-grade technologies such as depth-sensor based 3D scanning (e.g., Microsoft Kinect)
and low-cost photogrammetry, which use regular cameras, but results are generally of lower
quality and suitable only for low ﬁdelity non-player characters. In the industry, there are a
number of rapid character creation products that only require a single photo and create a
virtual human within seconds on a tablet or phone [Didimo 2019, itSeez3D 2020, Loom.ai
2020, Pinscreen 2019]. These methods are improving in quality and speed with recent ad-
vancements in computer vision and deep learning [Hu et al. 2017, Nagano et al. 2018, Saito
et al. 2017, Thies et al. 2016, Yamaguchi et al. 2018].

Once a 3D representation of a human character has been created, a number of different
techniques can be utilised in order to add detail and realism. A wide variety of render
styles from photorealistic to non-photorealistic can be achieved using rasterization for local
illumination or ray-tracing for more realistic global illumination [Marschner and Shirley
2016]. While the rasterizer is the current standard for real-time, recent GPU optimization
allows for ray-tracing in real-time, and we expect to see much higher realism in virtual
characters in the future with global-illumination.

Besides the underlying rendering approach, there are many other methods for adding
realism such as texture mapping, and approximating the surface reﬂectance through shad-
ing [Masson 2007]. Diffuse texture mapping enhances the character by adding image-based

1.3 Design 11

Figure 1.6 Left: Wireframe render of a character with no texture mapping, Center: diffuse textures
applied, Right: high quality rendering including normal maps, specular map, subsurface
scattering, global illumination, etc.

information to its geometry, while entailing only a small increase in computation. The basic
idea is to map the colour of the image or ‘texture’ onto the corresponding colour of an object
at each pixel [Catmull 1974] which adds the illusion of detail to the model, such as clothing
material and skin colour.

In order to add colour detail to virtual characters, diffuse texture maps are used which
deﬁne the color of diffused light (Figure 1.6). Additionally, there are situations where surfaces
are not smooth and roughness needs to be added if it is not present in the geometry. For
example, skin is not a smooth surface as it has imperfections such as pores and wrinkles.
These details are best added using normal maps which perturb the surface normals to add
detail or displacement maps which add geometric detail.

In modern computer graphics, surface properties are governed by shaders, the code snip-
pets describing how a surface should react to incident light. Many physically-based shaders
have been developed to produce realistic materials with different Bidirectional Reﬂectance
Distribution Functions (BRDF) [Nicodemus et al. 1992] (the function that relates the incident
to the reﬂected light). More recently, with the rapid advancements in graphics hardware, more
complex shading effects approximating a wide range of BRDFs can now be achieved in real-
time. For example, subsurface light transport in translucent materials [Jensen et al. 2001] for
realistic scattering of light on the skin was once a technique only used in off-line high-end
visual effects, but real-time methods [Jimenez et al. 2009, 2010] are now used to enhance the
realism in real-time.

Hair for interactive virtual characters has traditionally been modelled using card-based
rendering, where images of chunks of the hair are mapped onto large ﬂat sheets, to approxi-
mate the shape of a much larger number of individual hairs. Later advancements allowed for
modelling each individual hair which dramatically improves realism. For rendering of hair,

1.3.3.2

1.3 Design 12

physically-based ﬁber reﬂectance models are used, based on a combination of an anisotropic
specular and a diffuse component [Kajiya and Kay 1989]. More recently, the scattering distri-
bution of the hair ﬁber is split into different lobes based on the number of internal reﬂections
within the ﬁber [Marschner et al. 2003].

The use of physically-based simulations is ubiquitous for realism in virtual clothing, where
fast mass-spring models [Liu et al. 2013] or more complex implicitly integrated continuum
techniques [Baraff and Witkin 1998] are used in the state-of-the-art. Implementing realistic
cloth and hair dynamics in real-time applications still represents a signiﬁcant challenge for
developers since simulation dynamics need to be solved at run-time, and are required to be
fast and stable. Based on this, depictions of stiff clothing and hair with little secondary-motion
effects are still commonplace for interactive virtual characters across a range of applications
from video games to virtual assistants.

Industrial design of robots
The paragraphs above have discussed design approaches, e.g., metaphorical design, to and the
resources used, e.g., facial features, for the development of agent appearance. Another factor
that signiﬁcantly affects agent appearance is the industrial design of physical agents or the
physical platforms in which virtual or hybrid agents are presented, including form, material
use, scale, color choice, and so on. Although there are no systematic studies of how these
factors affect agent appearance or how they must be designed to maximize user experience,
the HRI literature includes reports of the design process for the appearance of speciﬁc robot
platforms. For example, Lee et al. [2009] described the design process for Snackbot, a robot
designed to deliver snacks in an academic building, including the form of the housing of the
robotic hardware and the snack tray that the robot would carry; the material and colors used
to construct the housing and the tray; the height of the robot; and the expressive features of
the head and face of the robot. Another example is the design of the Simon humanoid robot,
where the research team explored the proportions that the robot’s head and body should follow,
the placement of the eyes on the head, facial features that would achieve the appearance
of a “friendly doll,” and the interplay between the design of the housing and structural or
mechanical elements of the robot’s head [Diana and Thomaz 2011]. Hegel et al. [2010]
documented and reported on the industrial design of the social robot Flobi, which included an
exploration of the design of the robot’s head to follow a “baby face” schema; effective color
combinations of the robot’s face, hair, lips, and eyebrows; and how blushing on the robot’s
cheeks could be achieved using LEDs placed behind the surface of the face. A ﬁnal example is
the design of Kip1, a peripheral robotic conversation companion, involving form and material
exploration through sketches and mock-ups [Hoffman et al. 2015]. Figure 1.7 illustrates the
sketches and mock-ups generated in the industrial design of some of these examples.

In all of the examples discussed above, the research team engaged professional industrial
designers or members of the research team with training in industrial design as well as an

1.4 Features 13

Figure 1.7 Sketches and models generated during the industrial design of the Snackbot [Lee et al. 2009]

(top-left), Simon [Diana and Thomaz 2011] (top-right), and Kip1 [Hoffman et al. 2015]
(bottom) robots.

iterative design process. The literature does not include any discussion of such considerations
for virtual characters, and characters designed for research and commercial use all utilize
existing display platforms, such as mobile phones, tablet computers, computer monitors,
large displays, or virtual- or mixed-reality environments. Overall, there is a great need for
systematic research on the industrial design of the appearance of agents, including the effects
of the physical design of the agent itself and the environment within which virtual agents are
presented on user interaction and experience.

1.4 Features

The design approaches described above draw on a rich space of features, shaped by the
metaphor followed by the design (e.g., humanlike features included in the design of a virtual
human), functional requirements of the agent (e.g., light displays placed on physical robots
to convey the agent’s status), and/or aesthetic and experiential goals of the design (e.g.,
material, color, and texture choices for a robot). The paragraphs below provide an overview
of this space, focusing on facial and bodily features as well as features that communicate
demographic characteristics of virtual and physical agent embodiments.

1.4.1 Facial features

The face of an agent serves as the primary interface between the agent and its user, and facial
features make up a substantial portion of the design space for agents. Even when designs lack

1.4 Features 14

anthropomorphic or zoomorphic faces, people attribute facial features to them, highlighting
the importance of faces in the perception of non-living objects [K¨uhn et al. 2014]. Designers
of virtual and physical agents draw on this human propensity and create faces that can display
conversational cues, express affect, and communicate direction of attention.

In order to convey a true feeling of life in a character, the appearance of the eye is highly
important. Rendering techniques such as adding specular and reﬂection maps can be very
useful for this purpose to increase the appearance of wetness and to reﬂect the environment.
Additionally, more advanced techniques such as ambient occlusion allow for soft shadowing,
and refraction to replicate the refraction of light that passes through the eyeball, which is
ﬁlled with ﬂuid. Creating the geometry of the eye is a difﬁcult task, due to the complexity
of the surface but there exist special photogrammetry rigs for capturing the visible parts of
the eye—the white sclera, the transparent cornea, and the non-rigidly deforming colored iris
[B´erard et al. 2014]. Computer generated eyes used in computer graphics applications are
typically gross approximations of the actual geometry and material of a real eye. This is
also true for facial expressions, which typically take a simple approach of linearly blending
pre-generated expression meshes (blendshapes) to create new expressions and motion [Anjyo
2018]. However, little is known about how these approximations affect user perception of the
appearance of virtual characters.

Similar to the studies on real humans, virtual humans with narrow eyes have been rated
as more aggressive and less trustworthy for both abstract creatures [Ferstl et al. 2017] and
more realistic depictions [Ferstl and McDonnell 2018] (Figure 1.8). It should be noted that
for realistic eye size alterations, the size of the eyes themselves should not be scaled as this
will be quickly perceived as eerie and artiﬁcial [Wang et al. 2013]. Instead, the shape of the
eyelids can be changed as protruding eyes appear larger, whereas hooded and monolid eyes
appear smaller.

In contrast to human face studies, wider faces were not judged as less trustworthy, and
were perceived as less aggressive compared to narrow faces for realistic [Wang et al. 2013]
and abstract virtual characters [Ferstl et al. 2017], even when a particularly masculine rather
than a babyface appearance was presented [Ferstl and McDonnell 2018]. The results of
these studies support the notion that virtual faces are perceived differently from real human
faces. A potential explanation could be the tendency of villains in animated movies to be
portrayed with narrow, long, sharp facial features (e.g., Captain Hook in Peter Pan (Clyde
Geronimi, 1953), Scar in The Lion King (Roger Allers, 1994), Maleﬁcent in Sleeping Beauty
(Clyde Geronimi, 1959)). This tendency could inﬂuence the perception of computer-generated
characters towards automatic association of narrow faces with dangerous characters.

Other work has addressed the perception of rather unusual facial proportions for realistic
characters and their inﬂuence on perceived appeal. Seyama and Nagayama [2007] studied eye
size by morphing between photographs of real people and dolls, and found that characters
were judged as unpleasant if the eyes had strong deviations from their original size. Partic-

1.4 Features 15

ipants were more sensitive to the alterations for real faces than for artiﬁcial faces. Several
studies conﬁrmed that altering facial parts lowers perceived appeal, especially for humanlike
characters. Green et al. [2008] demonstrated that not only proportions, but also the placement
of facial parts may negatively affect the perceived appeal. The measured effect was greater for
the humanlike and more attractive faces. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that a mis-
match of realism between facial parts negatively affects appeal [Burleigh et al. 2013, Mac-
Dorman et al. 2009].

Figure 1.8 Left: Examples of eye and head shape manipulations on abstract characters (based on [Ferstl
et al. 2017]), Right: More subtle facial feature manipulations on realistic virtual characters
(adapted from [Ferstl and McDonnell 2018]).

Prior work in HRI includes a large body of literature on the facial features of robotic
agents. A number of studies aimed to characterize the design space for robot faces. Blow et al.
[2006a] characterized this space as varying across the dimensions of abstraction, from low to
high abstraction, and realism, from realistic to iconic, borrowing from literature on the design
of cartoon faces [McCloud 1993]. DiSalvo et al. [2002] carried out an analysis of 48 robots
and conducted an exploratory survey that resulted in a number of design recommendations
to improve human perceptions of humanlike robots: (1) the head and the eye space should
be wide; (2) facial features should dominate the face with minimal space for a forehead and
a chin, (3) the design should include eyes with sufﬁcient complexity; (4) the addition of a
nose, a mouth, and eyelids improve perceptions of humanlikeness; and (5) the head should
include a skin or a casing that core the electromechanical components. A similar analysis
was carried out by Kalegina et al. [2018] of 157 rendered robot faces—physical robots that

1.4 Features 16

Figure 1.9 The 157 faces analyzed by Kalegina et al. [2018] (left), their analysis of facial features used
in the design of the robot faces (right-top), and the spectrum of facial realism (right-bottom).
Copyright Information: Images included in this paper under ACM guidelines on Fair Use

are equipped with a screen-based face and facial features that are virtually rendered on the
screen—who coded the faces for 76 different features and conducted a survey to understand
how each feature affected user perceptions of the robot (Figure 1.14). The study found that
faces with no pupils and no mouth were consistently ranked as being unfriendly, machinelike,
and unlikable; those with pink or cartoon-style cheeks were perceived as being feminine; and
faces with detailed blue eyes were found to be friendly and trustworthy. Survey participants
also expressed preferences for robots with speciﬁc facial features for speciﬁc contexts of use,
e.g., selecting robots with no pupils and no mouth for security work and faces with detailed
blue eyes for entertainment applications. Consistently, Goetz et al. [2003] argued that there is
not a universally preferred design for the facial features of a robot, but that people prefer
appearances that match the robot’s task. They varied the robot’s appearance across three
stylistic dimensions—human vs. machine, youth vs. adult, and male vs. female—and found
that user preferences for facial features presented in these styles depended on the robot’s task.
In a follow-up study, Powers and Kiesler [2006] showed that the length of the robot’s chin
and the fundamental frequency of its voice predicted whether participants expressed interest
in following advice from the robot.

The literature also includes reports of the process for the design and development of
faces for several robot platforms. For example, the design of the iCub social robot primarily
involved the mechanical replication of human anatomical mechanisms to achieve realistic eye
and head movements and the design of the rest of the face to follow a “toy-like” appearance
[Beira et al. 2006]. The design speciﬁcations for the face of the KASPAR social robot included
a sufﬁciently expressive but minimal design, an iconic overall design (as opposed to a realistic
one), a humanlike appearance, and the ability to express autonomy, communicate attention,
and display projected expressions [Blow et al. 2006b, Dautenhahn et al. 2009]. The design
of the humanoid robot HUBO integrated an abstract body with the overall appearance of an

1.4 Features 17

astronaut and an highly humanlike face using elastomer-based materials that appeared and
moved similar to human skin and a 28-degree-of-freedom mechanism to achieve humanlike
facial movements [Oh et al. 2006]. The faces of robots including the Flobi [L¨utkebohle et al.
2010], Melvin [Shayganfar et al. 2012], and iCat [van Breemen 2004] featured pairs of ﬂexible
actuators that served as the robot’s lips and pairs of eyebrows to express emotion. As discussed
earlier, the design of the face of the Flobi robot, shown in Figure 1.14, additionally included
sophisticated mechanisms for emotion expression, such as lights placed behind the cheeks to
enable the appearance of blushing. These reports illustrate how different facial features come
together in the design of different robot systems and point to speciﬁc examples in the design
space of facial features for robots.

1.4.2 Bodily features

While the face serves as the primary interface for human-agent interaction, the remainder of an
agent’s body also contributes to the appearance of the agent. The design space for an agent’s
body primarily includes several bodily features, how these features come together structurally,
and how they are represented.

A virtual agent’s body can be presented in a range of different styles, from low-detailed
stick-ﬁgures or point-light displays to photorealistic bodies or anthropomorphised creatures,
and there have been some studies aimed at investigating the effect of the body representation
on perception of the agent’s appearance and actions. Most studies apply motion captured
animations to a virtual character and map the motion onto a range of bodies and assess if
the different bodies change the meaning of the motion. Typically, factors such as emotion,
gender, and biological motion are chosen since these have all been shown to be identiﬁable
solely through motion cues (e.g.,[Cutting and Kozlowski 1977, Johansson 1973, Kozlowski
and Cutting 1977]) thus allowing the contribution of the bodies appearance to be assessed.

Beginning with a study by Hodgins et al. [1998], the amount of detail in a virtual charac-
ter’s representation has been studied to investigate the effect on perception. Their study found
that viewers’ perception of motion characteristics is affected by the geometric model used for
rendering. They observed higher sensitivity to changes in motion when applied to a polygonal
model, than a stick ﬁgure. Chaminade et al. [2007] also found an effect on motion perception,
where character anthropomorphism decreased the tendency to report their motion as biologi-
cal, while another study found that emotions were perceived as less intense on characters with
lower geometric detail [McDonnell et al. 2009b].

Body shape has also been investigated where it was found that a virtual character’s
body does not affect recognition of body emotions, even for extreme characters, such as a
zombie with decomposing ﬂesh [McDonnell et al. 2009b] (Figure 1.10). Fleming et al. [2016]
evaluated the appeal and realism of female body shapes, which were created as morphs
between a realistic character and stylized versions following design principles of major
computer animation studios. Surprisingly, the most appealing characters were in-between

1.4 Features 18

Figure 1.10 Different structural and material representations for agent body [McDonnell et al. 2009c].

morphs, where 33% morphs had the highest scores for realism and appeal and 66% morphs
were rated as equally appealing, but less realistic (Figure 1.11).

The perception of sex of a virtual character’s walking motion has also been found to be
affected by body shape. Adding stereotypical indicators of sex to the body shapes of male and
female characters inﬂuences sex perception. Exaggerated female body shapes inﬂuenced sex
judgements more than exaggerated male shapes [McDonnell et al. 2009a].

In virtual reality, embodiment of virtual characters is where the user is positioned virtually
inside the body of a virtual avatar, where they have agency over that virtual body. The
character model used for the virtual avatar can affect the behaviour of the user, from becoming
more conﬁdent when embodied in a taller avatar, more friendly as an attractive avatar [Yee
and Bailenson 2009], to reducing implicit racial bias by embodying an avatar of a different
race [Banakou et al. 2016]. This powerful effect is referred to as the Proteus effect [Yee and
Bailenson 2007] (named after the Greek god known for his ability to take on many different
physical forms). The use of self-avatars or virtual doppelgangers has also been shown to affect
outcomes, with generally a positive inﬂuence on aspects such as cognitive load [Steed et al.
2016], pain modulation [Romano et al. 2014] and embodiment [Fribourg et al. 2020, Kilteni
et al. 2012]. These effects describe to some extent the dynamism of interactions between users
and avatars.

The design of a physical robot’s body is shaped by a number of factors, including the
metaphor that the design follows, the functional requirements of the robot, and environmental
constraints that the design must consider. The ﬁrst factor, the design metaphor, might dictate
how the body of the robot is structured and the features that are articulated in the design.

1.4 Features 19

For example, the Paro robot [Wada and Shibata 2007] follows the metaphor of a baby
seal, and the design of the robot’s body roughly follows the form of a seal, including fore
and hind ﬂippers. The functional requirement of the robot might include speciﬁc forms of
mobility, such as holonomic movement, climbing stairs, or movement across rough terrain,
or prehensile manipulation involving a single arm or two arms. Depending on such design
requirements, the design of the body of a robot might follow a humanoid design including
humanlike limbs attached to a torso, such as the ASIMO robot [Sakagami et al. 2002], or a
single arm attached on a mobile base, such as the Fetch robot [Wise et al. 2016]. Finally, the
environment that the robot is designed for can dictate the bodily features of the robot, such
as requiring that a robot that crawls into tight spaces has a low proﬁle and limbs that can be
tucked away, such as a Packbot robot [Yamauchi 2004] used in search-and-rescue scenarios.
In addition to bodily features borrowed from the design metaphor, such as the hind ﬂippers
of a seal or the legs of a human, the design of physical robots also utilize features that
facilitate speciﬁc functions. These functions include communication, and features that support
communication include lights that communicate the robot’s affective states using different
colors [Bethel and Murphy 2007] or light arrays that convey information about the robot’s
direction of motion using light patterns [Szaﬁr et al. 2015]. Features of a robot’s body may
also support transferring items, such as a tray that the Snackbot robot held to carry food items
[Lee et al. 2009] and the different conﬁgurations of carts that hospital delivery robots pull to
transport materials [Ozkil et al. 2009].

Figure 1.11 Stylization applied at different levels (33%, 66%, 100%) to captured performer body (0%) in

Marvel and Disney styles (image based on Fleming et al. [2016]).

1.4 Features 20

Figure 1.12 Six body shapes with indicators of gender [McDonnell et al. 2009a].

An agent’s body can also include bodily features, such as clothing or furniture, designed to
support the agent’s character or backstory or eventually improve user experience with the
agent. For example, the Roboreceptionist robot was placed in a booth that resembled an
information booth and wore clothes that were consistent with the gender and the backstory of
its character [Gockley et al. 2005]. The Geminoid robot, a highly realistic android developed
to serve as a robotic surrogate to support remote communication, was constructed to resemble
its creator and dressed in similar fashion [Nishio et al. 2007]. Figure 1.13 illustrates examples
of bodily features that support speciﬁc functions, such as a tray, and that support the agent’s
character, such as clothing.

Figure 1.13 Bodily features that support speciﬁc functions, such as a tray that the robot uses to delivery

snacks [Lee et al. 2009] (left) and light arrays that a ﬂying robot uses to communicate
direction [Szaﬁr et al. 2015] (left-center), and that support the agent’s character, such as a
booth and clothing for a receptionist robot [Lee et al. 2010] (right-center) and clothing for a
surrogate robot [Watanabe et al. 2015] (right).

1.4 Features 21

Figure 1.14 Facial features of the Flobi robot that provide the robot with different demographic
characteristics. Left: neutral male (top) and smiling female (bottom) faces; Center: the
physical parts that represent facial features; Right: different hair and lip styles. Adapted from
L¨utkebohle et al. [2010].

1.4.3 Features expressing demographic characteristics

Agent appearance communicates other attributes of the character of the agent, such as gender,
age, race, and ethnicity. Virtual agents are usually designed as distinctive characters, such as
the two female nurse characters, one middle-aged Caucasian and one middle-aged African
American, designed by Bickmore et al. [2009] to match user patient demographics. Physical
agents, on the other hand, are designed as characters with ambiguous features and interchange-
able parts that highlight speciﬁc character attributes, such as the interchangeable hair and lips
of the Flobi robot that communicate a male or female gender [L¨utkebohle et al. 2010] (Figure
1.14).

A large body of research on human-agent interaction has shown such character attributes to
signiﬁcantly shape interaction outcomes. For example, Siegel et al. [2009] asked participants
to make an optional donation to a robot that used pre-recorded male or female voices, which
research has shown to be sufﬁcient to trigger gender stereotypes [Nass et al. 1997], and found a
signiﬁcant interaction between robot and participant gender over the proportion of participants
who donated any amount, e.g., men consistently donating more to a female robot. Eyssel and
Hegel [2012] manipulated the gender of the Flobi robot by varying the robot’s appearance
via its interchangeable parts for hair and lips and found that participant perceptions of the
male and female robots closely followed gender stereotypes. The male robot was perceived
as having more agency and being more suitable for stereotypically male tasks (e.g., repair),
and the female robot was perceived as being more communal and being more suitable for
stereotypically female tasks (e.g., childcare).

The effect of stereotypes has also been studied for virtual characters, mostly in the context
of embodiment in virtual reality. The Proteus Effect, as mentioned previously, has addition-

1.4 Features 22

ally shown that users conform to stereotypes associated with their avatar’s appearance. For
example, embodiment in female avatars made players more likely to conform to female-typed
language norms [Palomares and Lee 2010] and made them more likely to engage in healing
activities [Yee et al. 2011]. Interestingly, these effects were observed regardless of the actual
gender of the player, indicating a tendency to conform to expectations associated with the
virtual gender.

In other work, Zibrek et al. [2015] explored gender bias on different types of emotions
applied on male and female virtual characters. They found that emotion biases gender per-
ception according to gender stereotypes: an angry motion is seen as more male, while fear
and sadness are seen as less male motions, and they observed a contrast effect where anger
was seen as more male when viewed on a female model than when viewed on a male model.
Similar effects were found for real humans [Hess et al. 2004], indicating that virtual humans
follow similar stereotyping effects.

1.4.4 Realism, Appeal, Uncanny Valley

Metaphorical design involves the application of a familiar metaphor to the design of an agent,
such a virtual human following the metaphor of a human. In practice, metaphors are applied
at different levels of abstraction due technical limitations (e.g., inability to closely replicate
the original metaphor) and design choices (e.g., stylization). Deng et al. [2019] argued that
designs follow discrete metaphors (e.g., a “baby seal” metaphor) but the realism in which
these metaphors are applied to vary along a spectrum of abstraction (e.g., a stylized or abstract
household robot vs. a highly realistic robotic surrogate). The design choices of metaphor and
abstraction result in differences in user perceptions of the agent and experience with it.

In the classic textbook “Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life,” Thomas and Johnston
[1995] use the term appeal to describe well designed, interesting and engaging characters.
This is contrary to many face perception studies, which use the term appeal and attractiveness
interchangeably. Appeal is an essential ingredient for virtual characters in video games
and movies, as well as for avatars, agents, and robots, to ensure audience engagement
and positive interactions. Creating highly detailed, photorealistic virtual characters does
not necessarily produce appealing results [Geller 2008], and it is often the case that more
stylized approximations evoke more positive audience responses and engagement [Zell et al.
2019]. However, additional factors are the context of the interaction and how appropriate the
appearance is under the circumstances. For example, having a fun cartoon-appearance may
be less appropriate for a more serious application such as a for a business meeting [Junuzovic
et al. 2012] or medical training [Volante et al. 2016], etc. Perception of appeal of virtual
characters is an ongoing area of research, with the ultimate goal to speed-up or automate the
process of producing appealing characters, and avoid negative reactions from audiences.

The term Uncanny Valley (UV) is often used to describe the negative reactions that can
occur towards virtual characters. It is a feeling of repulsion produced by artiﬁcial agents that

1.4 Features 23

Figure 1.15 Left: Examples of manipulating material (y-axis) and shape (x-axis) to vary character

realism and appeal, image based on Zell et al. [2015], Right: Examples of brightness and
shadow alterations on cartoon characters displaying emotion which were shown to change the
perceived intensity of emotion [Wisessing et al. 2020].

appear close to human-form but not quite real. This UV phenomenon was ﬁrst hypothesized
by in the 1970s by robotics professor Mori [1970]. Mori’s original hypothesis states that
as a robot’s appearance becomes more human, humans evoke more positive and empathetic
responses, until a point where the response quickly becomes strongly negative resulting
in feelings of disgust, eeriness and even fear. Once the robot’s appearance becomes less
distinguishable from a human being, the emotional response becomes positive once again.
This negative response has been attributed to many causes such as motion errors or lack of
familiarity or a mismatch in realism between elements of character design. More recently,
the UV hypothesis has been transferred to virtual humans in computer graphics, and has been
explored directly in some studies [Bartneck et al. 2009, MacDorman et al. 2009]. Virtual faces
in particular are difﬁcult to reproduce as humans are very adept at perceiving, and recognising
other faces and facial emotions.

As discussed previously, the appearance of a character can be separated into texture,
materials, shape and lighting. Various studies have attempted to isolate these factors and
independently examine the effect on appeal and UV.

Wallraven et al. [2007] studied the perceived realism, recognition, sincerity, and aesthetics
of real and computer-generated facial expressions using 2D ﬁlters to provide brush, cartoon,
and illustration styles and found that stylization caused differences in recognition accuracy
and perceived sincerity of expressions. Additionally, their realistic computer-generated faces
scored high aesthetic rankings, which is contrary to the UV theory. Pejsa et al. [2013] addi-

1.4 Features 24

tionally found no effect on appeal or lifelikeness between a character with human proportions
and one with stylized geometry including large eyes, while other studies found realistic and
cartoon depictions to be equally appealing when expressing personality [Ruhland et al. 2015]
and when a user had agency over their movements [Kokkinara and McDonnell 2015].

In order to investigate the effect of stylization in more detail, McDonnell et al. [2012] cre-
ated a range of appearances from abstract to realistic by altering the rendering style (texture,
material and lighting) of a realistically modelled male character while keeping the shape and
motion constant. They analyzed subjective ratings of appeal and trustworthiness and found
that the most realistic character was often rated as equally appealing or pleasant as the car-
toon characters, and equally trustworthy in a truth-telling task. A drop in appeal occurred for
characters in the middle of the scale (rated neither abstract nor realistic), which was attributed
to the difﬁculty in categorizing these characters due to their uncommon appearance [Saygin
et al. 2012]. Other studies of the UV that used still images generated by morphing between
photographs and animated characters also found valleys in participant ratings of uncanniness
for intermediate morphs [Green et al. 2008, Hanson 2005, Seyama and Nagayama 2007]. This
idea was further developed in the categorization ambiguity hypothesis [Cheetham and Jancke
2013, Yamada et al. 2013], where it was shown that this response is more prominent when
the morph is between a real human and an inanimate object or representation of a human.
Studies focusing on neurocognitive mechanisms attribute negative evaluation to a competing
visual-category representations during recognition [Ferrey et al. 2015].

This effect was also investigated in a study by Carter et al. [2013] where they created a
realistic, cartoon, and robot female character and assessed subjective pleasantness ratings as
well as analyzing eye-tracking as a psychophysiological measure. Contrary to the UV theory,
they found higher ratings of unpleasantness for their cartoon than for their realistic character,
and that ﬁxations were affected by subjective perceptions of pleasantness.

Investigating yet more parameters, Zell et al. [2015] independently examined the dimen-
sions of shape, texture, material and lighting, by creating a range of stimuli of characters with
various levels of realism and stylization (Figure 1.15 (left)). Their study identiﬁed that the
shape of the character’s face is the main descriptor for realism, and material increases real-
ism only for realistic shapes. Also, that strong mismatches in stylization between material
and shape made characters unappealing and eerie, in particular abstract shapes with realistic
materials were perceived as highly eerie, validating the design choices of some horror movies
with living puppets. Finally, blurring or stylizing a realistic texture can achieve a make-up
effect, increasing character appeal and attractiveness, without reducing realism. The opposite
was found in a study on body stylization, where the stylization of body shape predicted appeal
ratings rather than improvements to render quality [Fleming et al. 2016].

More recently, Wisessing et al. [2020] carried out an in-depth analysis of the effect
of lighting on appeal, particularly brightness and shadows, and found that increasing the
brightness of the key-light or lessening the key-to-ﬁll ratio (lighter shadows) increased the

1.4 Features 25

Figure 1.16 State-of-the-art real-time virtual humans in Unreal Engine 4 created by 3Lateral in

collaboration with Cubic Motion, Epic Games, Tencent and Vicon. Left: Siren demo. Right:
virtual replica of the actor Andy Serkis. With permission of Epic Games © 2020.

appeal ratings (Figure 1.15 (right)). They also found little effect of key-light brightness on
eeriness but reported reduced eeriness as a consequence of lightening the shadows, which
could be used to reduce UV effects of virtual characters. However, shadow lightening did not
improve appeal for characters with realistic appearance, and thus key-light brightness alone
should be used to enhance appeal for such characters.

Several studies in immersive VR have also examined the effect of character appearance on
viewer responses, focusing on co-presence, i.e., the sense that one is present and engaged in an
interpersonal space with the character [Biocca 1997, Garau et al. 2003]. While some evidence
conﬁrms the importance of realistic appearance [Nowak 2001, Zibrek and McDonnell 2019],
others put less importance on it [Garau et al. 2003, Slater and Steed 2002]. On the other
hand, a mismatch between the realism of behaviour and appearance has been often shown to
lower the feeling of co-presence [Bailenson et al. 2005]. There are a number of reasons why
mismatches may cause negative effects on the viewer. A mismatch between the physical and
emotional states of a character violate expectations and thus can result in a breakdown in how
users experience agents [Vinayagamoorthy et al. 2006].

1.5 Summary

1.5 Summary 26

Technical advancements are increasingly pushing the boundaries of how agents are designed
and developed, the capabilities of these agents, and their use in human environments. The
rapid development in real-time rendering technologies has enabled incredibly detailed, high-
quality virtual character appearances (Figure 1.16), often reaching photorealism [Epic Games,
Inc. 2018, Seymour et al. 2017]. Deep learning is also improving the ease and speed at
which characters can be created, even from a single photograph [Yamaguchi et al. 2018].
Additionally, animation and behaviours are starting to become easier and less expensive
to create, allowing virtual human technologies to be more accessible to a wider audience
than ever before. With these advancements comes the increasing use of characters across
different domains such as education, sales, therapy, entertainment, social media, and virtual
and augmented reality.

New methods are also emerging for the construction of physical robots. Rapid fabrication
methods, such as 3D printing, have led to the development of new robot morphologies,
including 3D printable robots inspired by “origami” [Onal et al. 2014] and robots with soft
skin that can change appearance and texture to communicate internal states to the user [Hu
et al. 2018]. Mixed-reality technologies are also being utilized to facilitate human interaction
with robots, including displaying cues that communicate the motion intent [Walker et al. 2018]
and and the ﬁeld of view [Hedayati et al. 2018] of the robot. Finally, robots are increasingly
being integrated into human environments across different domains, including manufacturing
[Saupp´e and Mutlu 2015], education [Belpaeme et al. 2018, Michaelis and Mutlu 2018], food
services [Jennings and Figliozzi 2019], hospitality [Tussyadiah and Park 2018], surveillance
[Inbar and Meyer 2019], and healthcare [Miseikis et al. 2020, Mutlu and Forlizzi 2008]. As
applications proliferate, we will gain a better understanding of how the design space for agent
appearance is utilized to support each application domain, how the features of this space
affect user perceptions of and experience with these agents, and how the appearance of robotic
agents might be designed to support personalization, customization, and environmental ﬁt.

In this chapter, we have shown that the choice of appearance can have implications for
human interactions in a number of ways, including changes to the perception of personality,
emotion, trust, and conﬁdence. Studies have shown that the many factors that constitute the
ﬁnal appearance of an agent, such as the design metaphor, modality of representation, and
methods of agent construction, including modelling, texturing, materials, and even lighting,
have different effects on how people perceive and respond to it. This multidimensionality has
the drawback that some factors might cancel each other out or amplify each other, leading
to inconsistent conclusions. Additionally, more frequent exposure to agents and increasing
technological sophistication may continuously change the way we perceive them, much like
how we are becoming more and more sensitive to poor visual effects in movies [Tinwell et al.

2011]. The need for understanding the implications of different appearances of agents has
therefore never been greater.

1.5 Summary 27

Bibliography

S. Al Moubayed, J. Beskow, G. Skantze, and B. Granstr¨om. 2012. Furhat: a back-projected human-
In Cognitive behavioural systems, pp.

like robot head for multiparty human-machine interaction.
114–130. Springer.

K. Anjyo. 2018. Blendshape Facial Animation, pp. 2145–2155. Springer International Publishing,
Cham. ISBN 978-3-319-14418-4. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14418-4 2. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-14418-4 2.

J. N. Bailenson, K. R. Swinth, C. L. Hoyt, S. Persky, A. Dimov, and J. Blascovich. 2005. The indepen-
dent and interactive effects of embodied-agent appearance and behavior on self-report, cognitive, and
behavioral markers of copresence in immersive virtual environments. Presence, 14(4): 379–393.

W. A. Bainbridge, J. W. Hart, E. S. Kim, and B. Scassellati. 2011. The beneﬁts of interactions with
physically present robots over video-displayed agents. International Journal of Social Robotics, 3(1):
41–52.

D. Banakou, P. D. Hanumanthu, and M. Slater. 2016. Virtual embodiment of white people in a
black virtual body leads to a sustained reduction in their implicit racial bias. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 10: 601. ISSN 1662-5161. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2016.
00601. DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00601.

D. Baraff and A. Witkin.

1998. Large steps in cloth simulation.

In Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’98, p. 43–54.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. ISBN 0897919998. https://doi.org/10.
1145/280814.280821. DOI: 10.1145/280814.280821.

C. Bartneck, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, and N. Hagita. 2009. My robotic doppelg¨anger – a critical look at

the uncanny valley. In Proc. of Robot and Human Interactive Communication, pp. 269–276.

R. Beira, M. Lopes, M. Prac¸a, J. Santos-Victor, A. Bernardino, G. Metta, F. Becchi, and R. Saltar´en.
2006. Design of the robot-cub (icub) head. In Proceedings 2006 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2006. ICRA 2006., pp. 94–100. IEEE.

T. Belpaeme, J. Kennedy, A. Ramachandran, B. Scassellati, and F. Tanaka. 2018. Social robots for

education: A review. Science robotics, 3(21).

P. B´erard, D. Bradley, M. Nitti, T. Beeler, and M. Gross. Nov. 2014. High-quality capture of eyes.
ISSN 0730-0301. https://doi.org/10.1145/2661229.2661285. DOI:

ACM Trans. Graph., 33(6).
10.1145/2661229.2661285.

C. L. Bethel and R. R. Murphy. 2007. Survey of non-facial/non-verbal affective expressions for
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C

appearance-constrained robots.
(Applications and Reviews), 38(1): 83–92.

T. W. Bickmore, L. M. Pfeifer, and B. W. Jack. 2009. Taking the time to care: empowering low health
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on

literacy hospital patients with virtual nurse agents.
human factors in computing systems, pp. 1265–1274.

29

BIBLIOGRAPHY 30

F. Biocca. 1997. The cyborg’s dilemma: Progressive embodiment in virtual environments [1]. Journal

of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3(2): 0–0.

M. Blow, K. Dautenhahn, A. Appleby, C. L. Nehaniv, and D. Lee. 2006a. The art of designing robot
In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART

faces: Dimensions for human-robot interaction.
conference on Human-robot interaction, pp. 331–332.

M. Blow, K. Dautenhahn, A. Appleby, C. L. Nehaniv, and D. C. Lee. 2006b. Perception of robot smiles
and dimensions for human-robot interaction design. In ROMAN 2006-The 15th IEEE International
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, pp. 469–474. IEEE.

T. J. Burleigh, J. R. Schoenherr, and G. L. Lacroix. 2013. Does the Uncanny Valley exist? An empirical
test of the relationship between eeriness and the human likeness of digitally created faces. Computers
in Human Behavior, 29(3): 759–771.

E. J. Carter, M. Mahler, and J. K. Hodgins. 2013. Unpleasantness of animated characters increases
viewer attention to faces. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium in Applied Perception, pp. 35–40.

J. Cassell. 2000. Embodied conversational interface agents. Communications of the ACM, 43(4): 70–78.

J. Cassell. 2001. Embodied conversational agents: representation and intelligence in user interfaces. AI

magazine, 22(4): 67–67.

E. Catmull. 1974. A subdivision algorithm for computer display of curved surfaces. PhD thesis, Dept.

of CS, University of Utah.

T. Chaminade, J. Hodgins, and M. Kawato.

2007. Anthropomorphism inﬂuences perception of

computer-animated characters’ actions. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 2(3).

M. Cheetham and L. Jancke. 2013. Perceptual and category processing of the uncanny valley hypothesis’
dimension of human likeness: some methodological issues. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE,
(76).

B. Colligan. 2011 (accessed June 30, 2020). How the Knowledge Navigator video came about.

http://www.dubberly.com/articles/how-the-knowledge-navigator-video-came-about.html.

J. E. Cutting and L. T. Kozlowski. 1977. Recognizing friends by their walk: Gait perception without

familiarity cues. Bulletin of the psychonomic society, 9(5): 353–356.

Z. Dai and K. F. MacDorman. 2018. The doctor’s digital double: how warmth, competence, and

animation promote adherence intention. PeerJ Computer Science, 4: e168.

K. Dautenhahn, C. L. Nehaniv, M. L. Walters, B. Robins, H. Kose-Bagci, N. Assif, M. Blow, et al.
2009. Kaspar–a minimally expressive humanoid robot for human–robot interaction research. Applied
Bionics and Biomechanics, 6(3, 4): 369–397.

E. Deng, B. Mutlu, and M. Mataric. 2019. Embodiment in socially interactive robots. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1912.00312.

C. Diana and A. L. Thomaz. 2011. The shape of simon: creative design of a humanoid robot shell. In

CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 283–298.

Didimo, 2019. The breathtaking reality of your digital you. https://mydidimo.com/. https://mydidimo.

com/.

C. F. DiSalvo, F. Gemperle, J. Forlizzi, and S. Kiesler. 2002. All robots are not created equal: the
design and perception of humanoid robot heads. In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing
interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques, pp. 321–326.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 31

Epic Games, Inc., Mar 2018. Siren. https://www.3lateral.com/projects/siren.html. https://www.3lateral.

com/projects/siren.html.

F. Eyssel and F. Hegel. 2012. (s) he’s got the look: Gender stereotyping of robots 1. Journal of Applied

Social Psychology, 42(9): 2213–2230.

A. E. Ferrey, T. J. Burleigh, and M. J. Fenske. 2015. Stimulus-category competition, inhibition, and

affective devaluation: a novel account of the Uncanny Valley. Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 249.

Y. Ferstl and R. McDonnell. 2018. A perceptual study on the manipulation of facial features for trait
portrayal in virtual agents. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA), pp. 281–288.
DOI: 10.1145/3267851.3267891.

Y. Ferstl, E. Kokkinara, and R. McDonnell. 2017. Facial features of non-player creatures can inﬂuence
moral decisions in video games. ACM Transaction on Applied Perception, 15(1): 4:1–4:12. ISSN
1544-3558. DOI: 10.1145/3129561.

R. Fleming, B. J. Mohler, J. Romero, M. J. Black, and M. Breidt. 2016. Appealing female avatars from
3D body scans: Perceptual effects of stylization. In Int. Conf. on Computer Graphics Theory and
Applications (GRAPP).

R. Fribourg, F. Argelaguet, A. L´ecuyer, and L. Hoyet. 2020. Avatar and sense of embodiment:
Studying the relative preference between appearance, control and point of view. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(5): 2062–2072. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.2973077.

M. Garau, M. Slater, V. Vinayagamoorthy, A. Brogni, A. Steed, and M. A. Sasse. 2003. The impact
of avatar realism and eye gaze control on perceived quality of communication in a shared immersive
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
virtual environment.
systems, pp. 529–536. ACM.

M. Garau, M. Slater, D.-P. Pertaub, and S. Razzaque. 2005. The responses of people to virtual humans in
an immersive virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 14(1): 104–116.

T. Geller. 2008. Overcoming the Uncanny Valley. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 28(4):

11–17.

R. Gockley, A. Bruce, J. Forlizzi, M. Michalowski, A. Mundell, S. Rosenthal, B. Sellner, R. Simmons,
K. Snipes, A. C. Schultz, et al. 2005. Designing robots for long-term social interaction. In 2005
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1338–1343. IEEE.

J. Goetz, S. Kiesler, and A. Powers. 2003. Matching robot appearance and behavior to tasks to improve
human-robot cooperation. In The 12th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, 2003. Proceedings. ROMAN 2003., pp. 55–60. Ieee.

H. Gouraud. 1971. Continuous shading of curved surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-20(6):

623–629.

R. D. Green, K. F. MacDorman, C.-C. Ho, and S. Vasudevan. 2008. Sensitivity to the proportions of

faces that vary in human likeness. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5): 2456–2474.

P. Hamet and J. Tremblay. 2017. Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine. Metabolism, 69: S36–S40.

D. Hanson. 2005. Expanding the aesthetics possibilities for humanlike robots.

In Proc. of IEEE

Humanoid Robotics Conf., Special Session on the Uncanny Valley.

H. Hedayati, M. Walker, and D. Szaﬁr. 2018. Improving collocated robot teleoperation with augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-

BIBLIOGRAPHY 32

tion, pp. 78–86.

F. Hegel, F. Eyssel, and B. Wrede. 2010. The social robot ‘ﬂobi’: key concepts of industrial design. In
19th International Symposium in Robot and Human Interactive Communication, pp. 107–112. IEEE.

U. Hess, R. B. Adams, and R. E. Kleck. 2004. Facial appearance, gender, and emotion expression.

Emotion, 4(4): 378–388.

J. K. Hodgins, J. F. O’Brien, and J. Tumblin. Dec. 1998. Perception of human motion with different
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 4(4): 101–113.

geometric models.
http://graphics.cs.berkeley.edu/papers/Hodgins-PHM-1998-12/.

G. Hoffman, O. Zuckerman, G. Hirschberger, M. Luria, and T. Shani-Sherman. 2015. Design and
evaluation of a peripheral robotic conversation companion. In 2015 10th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 3–10. IEEE.

M. Hoque, M. Courgeon, J.-C. Martin, B. Mutlu, and R. W. Picard. 2013. Mach: My automated
conversation coach. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and
ubiquitous computing, pp. 697–706.

L. Hu, S. Saito, L. Wei, K. Nagano, J. Seo, J. Fursund, I. Sadeghi, C. Sun, Y.-C. Chen, and H. Li. Nov.
2017. Avatar digitization from a single image for real-time rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 36(6): 195:1–195:14. ISSN 0730-0301.

Y. Hu, Z. Zhao, A. Vimal, and G. Hoffman. 2018. Soft skin texture modulation for social robotics. In

2018 IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft), pp. 182–187. IEEE.

O. Inbar and J. Meyer. 2019. Politeness counts: Perceptions of peacekeeping robots. IEEE Transactions

on Human-Machine Systems, 49(3): 232–240.

itSeez3D, 2020. Turn your mobile device into a powerful 3d scanner. https://itseez3d.com/. https:

//itseez3d.com/.

Y. Iwamura, M. Shiomi, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, and N. Hagita. 2011. Do elderly people prefer a
conversational humanoid as a shopping assistant partner in supermarkets? In Proceedings of the 6th
international conference on Human-robot interaction, pp. 449–456.

D. Jennings and M. Figliozzi. 2019. Study of sidewalk autonomous delivery robots and their potential

impacts on freight efﬁciency and travel. Transportation Research Record, 2673(6): 317–326.

H. W. Jensen, S. R. Marschner, M. Levoy, and P. Hanrahan. 2001. A practical model for subsurface

light transport. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH, pp. 511–518.

J. Jimenez, V. Sundstedt, and D. Gutierrez. 2009. Screen-space perceptual rendering of human skin.

ACM Transactions on Applied Perception, 6(4): 23:1–23:15.

J. Jimenez, T. Scully, N. Barbosa, C. Donner, X. Alvarez, T. Vieira, P. Matts, V. Orvalho, D. Gutierrez,
and T. Weyrich. 2010. A practical appearance model for dynamic facial color. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 29(6): 141:1–141:10.

G. Johansson. 1973. Visual perception of biological motion and a model for its analysis. Perception &

Psychophysics, 14(2): 201–211.

S. Junuzovic, K. Inkpen, J. Tang, M. Sedlins, and K. Fisher. 10 2012. To see or not to see: A
pp. 31–34. DOI:

study comparing four-way avatar, video, and audio conferencing for work.
10.1145/2389176.2389181.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 33

J. T. Kajiya and T. L. Kay. 1989. Rendering fur with three dimensional textures. SIGGRAPH Computer

Graphics, 23(3): 271–280.

A. Kalegina, G. Schroeder, A. Allchin, K. Berlin, and M. Cakmak. 2018. Characterizing the design
space of rendered robot faces. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 96–104.

S. Kiesler, A. Powers, S. R. Fussell, and C. Torrey. 2008. Anthropomorphic interactions with a robot

and robot–like agent. Social Cognition, 26(2): 169–181.

K. Kilteni, R. Groten, and M. Slater. 11 2012. The sense of embodiment in virtual reality. Presence

Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 21. DOI: 10.1162/PRES a 00124.

E. Kokkinara and R. McDonnell. 2015. Animation realism affects perceived character appeal of a
self-virtual face. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Motion in Games, pp.
221–226. Acm.

H. Kozima, M. P. Michalowski, and C. Nakagawa. 2009. Keepon.

International Journal of Social

Robotics, 1(1): 3–18.

L. T. Kozlowski and J. E. Cutting. 1977. Recognizing the sex of a walker from a dynamic point-light

display. Perception & Psychophysics, 21(6): 575–580.

S. K¨uhn, T. R. Brick, B. C. M¨uller, and J. Gallinat. 2014. Is this car looking at you? how anthropomor-

phism predicts fusiform face area activation when seeing cars. PloS one, 9(12): e113885.

M. K. Lee, J. Forlizzi, P. E. Rybski, F. Crabbe, W. Chung, J. Finkle, E. Glaser, and S. Kiesler. 2009. The
snackbot: documenting the design of a robot for long-term human-robot interaction. In Proceedings
of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference on Human robot interaction, pp. 7–14.

M. K. Lee, S. Kiesler, and J. Forlizzi. 2010. Receptionist or information kiosk: how do people talk with
a robot? In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, pp.
31–40.

J. C. Lester, C. B. Callaway, B. Stone, and S. G. Towns. 1997. Mixed initiative problem solving with

animated pedagogical agents. In Workshop on Pedagogical Agents, volume 19.

J. Li, R. Kizilcec, J. Bailenson, and W. Ju.

2016.

Computers in Human Behavior, 55: 1222 – 1230.

Social robots and virtual agents as lec-
DOI:

turers for video instruction.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.005.

T. Liu, A. W. Bargteil, J. F. O’Brien, and L. Kavan. Nov. 2013. Fast simulation of mass-spring systems.
http://cg.cis.upenn.edu/publications/Liu-FMS.

ACM Transactions on Graphics, 32(6): 209:1–7.
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2013, Hong Kong.

Loom.ai, 2020. 3d avatar platform for enterprise and developers. https://loomai.com/. https://loomai.

com/.

I. L¨utkebohle, F. Hegel, S. Schulz, M. Hackel, B. Wrede, S. Wachsmuth, and G. Sagerer. 2010. The
bielefeld anthropomorphic robot head “ﬂobi”. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, pp. 3384–3391. IEEE.

K. F. MacDorman, R. D. Green, C.-C. Ho, and C. T. Koch. 2009. Too real for comfort? Uncanny

responses to computer generated faces. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(3): 695–710.

S. Marschner and P. Shirley. 2016. Fundamentals of Computer Graphics. CRC Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 34

S. R. Marschner, H. W. Jensen, M. Cammarano, S. Worley, and P. Hanrahan. 2003. Light scattering

from human hair ﬁbers. ACM Transaction on Graphics, 22(3): 780–791. ISSN 0730-0301.

T. Masson. 2007. CG 101: A Computer Graphics Industry Reference. Digital Fauxtography.

S. McCloud. 1993. Understanding comics: The invisible art. Northampton, Mass.

R. McDonnell, S. J¨org, J. K. Hodgins, F. Newell, and C. O’sullivan. 2009a. Evaluating the effect of
motion and body shape on the perceived sex of virtual characters. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP), 5(4): 20.

R. McDonnell, S. J¨org, J. McHugh, F. N. Newell, and C. O’Sullivan. 2009b. Investigating the role of
body shape on the perception of emotion. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 6(3): 14.

R. McDonnell, M. Larkin, B. Hernandez, I. Rudomin, , and C. O’Sullivan. 2009c. Eye-catching Crowds:

saliency based selective variation. ACM Transaction on Graphics, 28(3): 55:1 – 55:10.

R. McDonnell, M. Breidt, and H. H. B¨ulthoff. 2012. Render me real? Investigating the effect of render
style on the perception of animated virtual humans. ACM Transaction on Graphics, 31(4): 91:1–
91:11.

J. E. Michaelis and B. Mutlu. 2018. Reading socially: Transforming the in-home reading experience

with a learning-companion robot. Science Robotics, 3(21).

J. Miseikis, P. Caroni, P. Duchamp, A. Gasser, R. Marko, N. Miseikiene, F. Zwilling, C. de Castelbajac,
L. Eicher, M. Fruh, et al. 2020. Lio–a personal robot assistant for human-robot interaction and care
applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09019.

M. Mori. 1970. The uncanny valley. Energy, 7(4): 33 – 35.

J. Mumm and B. Mutlu. 2011. Designing motivational agents: The role of praise, social comparison,

and embodiment in computer feedback. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(5): 1643–1650.

B. Mutlu and J. Forlizzi. 2008. Robots in organizations: the role of workﬂow, social, and environmental
In 2008 3rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-

factors in human-robot interaction.
Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 287–294. IEEE.

K. Nagano, J. Seo, J. Xing, L. Wei, Z. Li, S. Saito, A. Agarwal, J. Fursund, H. Li, R. Roberts, et al.

2018. pagan: real-time avatars using dynamic textures. ACM Trans. Graph., 37(6): 258–1.

C. Nass, Y. Moon, and N. Green. 1997. Are machines gender neutral? gender-stereotypic responses to

computers with voices. Journal of applied social psychology, 27(10): 864–876.

F. E. Nicodemus, J. C. Richmond, J. J. Hsia, I. W. Ginsberg, and T. Limperis. 1992. Geometrical

considerations and nomenclature for reﬂectance. 160: 4.

S. Nishio, H. Ishiguro, and N. Hagita. 2007. Geminoid: Teleoperated android of an existing person.

Humanoid robots: New developments, 14: 343–352.

K. Nowak. 2001. The inﬂuence of anthropomorphism on social judgment in social virtual environments.

In Annual Convention of the International Communication Association, Washington, DC.

J.-H. Oh, D. Hanson, W.-S. Kim, Y. Han, J.-Y. Kim, and I.-W. Park. 2006. Design of android type
humanoid robot albert hubo. In 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, pp. 1428–1433. IEEE.

C. D. Onal, M. T. Tolley, R. J. Wood, and D. Rus. 2014. Origami-inspired printed robots. IEEE/ASME

transactions on mechatronics, 20(5): 2214–2221.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 35

I. C. Orr. 1974. Puppet theatre in asia. Asian Folklore Studies, pp. 69–84.

A. G. Ozkil, Z. Fan, S. Dawids, H. Aanes, J. K. Kristensen, and K. H. Christensen. 2009. Service
robots for hospitals: A case study of transportation tasks in a hospital. In 2009 IEEE international
conference on automation and logistics, pp. 289–294. IEEE.

N. A. Palomares and E.-J. Lee. 2010. Virtual gender identity: The linguistic assimilation to gendered
avatars in computer-mediated communication. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 29(1):
5–23. DOI: 10.1177/0261927X09351675.

Y. Pan and A. Steed. 2016. A comparison of avatar-, video-, and robot-mediated interaction on users

trust in expertise. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3: 12. DOI: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00012.

T. Pejsa, B. Mutlu, and M. Gleicher. 2013. Stylized and performative gaze for character animation.
Computer Graphics Forum, 32(2pt2): 143–152. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cgf.
12034. DOI: 10.1111/cgf.12034.

B. T. Phong. 1975. Illumination for computer generated pictures. Communications of ACM, 18(6):

311–317.

Pinscreen, 2019. The most advanced ai-driven personalized avatars. https://www.pinscreen.com/.

https://www.pinscreen.com/.

A. Powers and S. Kiesler. 2006. The advisor robot: tracing people’s mental model from a robot’s
In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART conference on Human-robot

physical attributes.
interaction, pp. 218–225.

J. Pransky. 2001. Aibo–the no. 1 selling service robot. Industrial robot: An international journal.

T. J. Prescott, B. Mitchinson, and S. Conran. 2017. Miro: An animal-like companion robot with a
biomimetic brain-based control system. In Proceedings of the Companion of the 2017 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 50–51.

D. Romano, C. Pfeiffer, A. Maravita, and O. Blanke. 3 2014. Illusory self-identiﬁcation with an avatar
ISSN

reduces arousal responses to painful stimuli. Behavioural Brain Research, 261: 275–281.
01664328. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.049.

K. Ruhland, K. Zibrek, and R. McDonnell. 2015. Perception of personality through eye gaze of realistic

and cartoon models. In Proc. of Symp. on Applied Perception, pp. 19–23. ACM.

S. Saito, L. Wei, L. Hu, K. Nagano, and H. Li. 2017. Photorealistic facial texture inference using
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern

deep neural networks.
Recognition, pp. 5144–5153.

Y. Sakagami, R. Watanabe, C. Aoyama, S. Matsunaga, N. Higaki, and K. Fujimura. 2002. The intelligent
asimo: System overview and integration. In IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots
and systems, volume 3, pp. 2478–2483. IEEE.

A. Saupp´e and B. Mutlu. 2015. The social impact of a robot co-worker in industrial settings.

In
Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 3613–
3622.

A. P. Saygin, T. Chaminade, H. Ishiguro, J. Driver, and C. Frith. 2012. The thing that should not be:
Predictive coding and the Uncanny Valley in perceiving human and humanoid robot actions. Social
Cognitive Affective Neuroscience, 7(4): 413–422.

J. Scarce. 1983. Karagoz shadow puppets of turkey.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 36

J. Sculley. 1989. The relationship between business and higher education: A perspective on the
https://doi.org/10.1145/66451.66452. DOI:

21st century. Commun. ACM, 32(9): 1056–1061.
10.1145/66451.66452.

J. Seyama and R. S. Nagayama. 2007. The Uncanny Valley: Effect of realism on the impression of

artiﬁcial human faces. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 16(4): 337–351.

M. Seymour, C. Evans, and K. Libreri. 2017. Meet mike: epic avatars. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2017 VR

Village, pp. 1–2.

M. Shayganfar, C. Rich, and C. L. Sidner. 2012. A design methodology for expressing emotion on robot
faces. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 4577–4583.
IEEE.

M. Siegel, C. Breazeal, and M. I. Norton. 2009. Persuasive robotics: The inﬂuence of robot gender on
human behavior. In 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp.
2563–2568. IEEE.

S. Simon, C. William, and G. Jan. 1999. Enlightened automata. In The Sciences in Enlightened Europe,

Chicago and London. The University of Chicago Press.

M. Slater and A. Steed. 2002. Meeting people virtually: Experiments in shared virtual environments. In

The Social Life of Avatars, pp. 146–171. Springer.

A. Steed, Y. Pan, F. Zisch, and W. Steptoe. 2016. The impact of a self-avatar on cognitive load in

immersive virtual reality. pp. 67–76. DOI: 10.1109/VR.2016.7504689.

E. M. Suzanne R. Pallak and J. Koch. 1983. Communicator attractiveness and expertise, emotional
versus rational appeals, and persuasion: A heuristic versus systematic processing interpretation.
Social Cognition, 2(2): 122–141.

D. Szaﬁr, B. Mutlu, and T. Fong. 2015. Communicating directionality in ﬂying robots. In 2015 10th

ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 19–26. IEEE.

J. Thies, M. Zollh¨ofer, M. Stamminger, C. Theobalt, and M. Nießner. 2016. Face2face: Real-time face
capture and reenactment of rgb videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 2387–2395.

F. Thomas and O. Johnston. 1995. The illusion of life: Disney animation. Hyperion New York.

A. Tinwell, M. Grimshaw, D. A. Nabi, and A. Williams. 2011. Facial expression of emotion and
perception of the Uncanny Valley in virtual characters. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2): 741–
749.

I. Torre, E. Carrigan, K. McCabe, R. McDonnell, and N. Harte. 2018. Survival at the museum: A
cooperation experiment with emotionally expressive virtual characters. In Proceedings of the 2018
on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, pp. 423–427. ACM.

I. Torre, E. Carrigan, R. McDonnell, K. Domijan, K. McCabe, and N. Harte. 2019. The effect of mul-
timodal emotional expression and agent appearance on trust in human-agent interaction. In Motion,
Interaction and Games, MIG ’19. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. ISBN
9781450369947. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359566.3360065. DOI: 10.1145/3359566.3360065.

I. P. Tussyadiah and S. Park. 2018. Consumer evaluation of hotel service robots. In Information and

communication technologies in tourism 2018, pp. 308–320. Springer.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 37

A. van Breemen, X. Yan, and B. Meerbeek. 2005. icat: an animated user-interface robot with personality.
In Proceedings of the fourth international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent
systems, pp. 143–144.

A. J. van Breemen. 2004. Animation engine for believable interactive user-interface robots.

In
2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)(IEEE Cat. No.
04CH37566), volume 3, pp. 2873–2878. IEEE.

G. Veletsianos. Sept. 2010. Contextually relevant pedagogical agents: Visual appearance, stereotypes,
and ﬁrst impressions and their impact on learning. Comput. Educ., 55(2): 576–585. ISSN 0360-1315.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.02.019. DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2010.02.019.

V. Vinayagamoorthy, M. Gillies, A. Steed, E. Tanguy, X. Pan, C. Loscos, and M. Slater. 2006. Building
Expression into Virtual Characters. In B. Wyvill and A. Wilkie, eds., Eurographics 2006 - State of
the Art Reports. The Eurographics Association. DOI: 10.2312/egst.20061052.

M. Volante, S. V. Babu, H. Chaturvedi, N. Newsome, E. Ebrahimi, T. Roy, S. B. Daily, and T. Fasolino.
2016. Effects of virtual human appearance ﬁdelity on emotion contagion in affective inter-personal
simulations. IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(4): 1326–1335.

K. Wada and T. Shibata. 2007. Living with seal robots—its sociopsychological and physiological

inﬂuences on the elderly at a care house. IEEE transactions on robotics, 23(5): 972–980.

K. Wada, T. Shibata, T. Saito, K. Sakamoto, and K. Tanie. 2005. Psychological and social effects of one
year robot assisted activity on elderly people at a health service facility for the aged. In Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pp. 2785–2790. IEEE.

M. Walker, H. Hedayati, J. Lee, and D. Szaﬁr. 2018. Communicating robot motion intent with
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction, pp. 316–324.

C. Wallraven, H. H. B¨ulthoff, D. W. Cunningham, J. Fischer, and D. Bartz. 2007. Evaluation of real-
world and computer-generated stylized facial expressions. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception,
4(3).

Y. Wang, J. Geigel, and A. Herbert. 2013. Reading personality: Avatar vs. human faces. In Humaine
Association Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pp. 479–484. DOI:
10.1109/ACII.2013.85.

M. Watanabe, K. Ogawa, and H. Ishiguro. 2015. Can androids be salespeople in the real world? In
Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing
systems, pp. 781–788.

D. Whitley. 2012. The idea of nature in Disney animation: From Snow White to WALL-E. Ashgate

Publishing, Ltd.

M. Wise, M. Ferguson, D. King, E. Diehr, and D. Dymesich. 2016. Fetch and freight: Standard platforms

for service robot applications. In Workshop on autonomous mobile service robots.

P. Wisessing, K. Zibrek, D. W. Cunningham, J. Dingliana, and R. McDonnell. Apr. 2020. Enlighten me:
Importance of brightness and shadow for character emotion and appeal. ACM Trans. Graph., 39(3).
ISSN 0730-0301. https://doi.org/10.1145/3383195. DOI: 10.1145/3383195.

Y. Yamada, T. Kawabe, and K. Ihaya. 01 2013. Categorization difﬁculty is associated with negative
evaluation in the “uncanny valley” phenomenon. Japanese Psychological Research, 55: 20–32. DOI:
10.1111/j.1468-5884.2012.00538.x.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 38

S. Yamaguchi, S. Saito, K. Nagano, Y. Zhao, W. Chen, K. Olszewski, S. Morishima, and H. Li.
2018. High-ﬁdelity facial reﬂectance and geometry inference from an unconstrained image. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4): 1–14.

B. M. Yamauchi. 2004. Packbot: a versatile platform for military robotics. In Unmanned ground vehicle

technology VI, volume 5422, pp. 228–237. International Society for Optics and Photonics.

N. Yee and J. Bailenson. 07 2007. The proteus effect: The effect of transformed self-representation on
behavior. Human Communication Research, 33: 271 – 290. DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00299.x.

N. Yee and J. N. Bailenson. 2009. The difference between being and seeing: The relative contribution of
self-perception and priming to behavioral changes via digital self-representation. Media Psychology,
12(2): 195–209. DOI: 10.1080/15213260902849943.

N. Yee, N. Ducheneaut, M. Yao, and L. Nelson. 05 2011. Do men heal more when in drag? conﬂicting

identity cues between user and avatar. pp. 773–776. DOI: 10.1145/1978942.1979054.

Y. Yokota. 2009. A historical overview of japanese clocks and karakuri. In International Symposium on

History of Machines and Mechanisms, pp. 175–188. Springer.

E. Zell, C. Aliaga, A. Jarabo, K. Zibrek, D. Gutierrez, R. McDonnell, and M. Botsch. 2015. To stylize or
not to stylize?: The effect of shape and material stylization on the perception of computer-generated
faces. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 34(6): 184:1–184:12.

E. Zell, K. Zibrek, and R. McDonnell. 2019. Perception of virtual characters. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2019 Courses, SIGGRAPH ’19. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. ISBN
9781450363075. https://doi.org/10.1145/3305366.3328101. DOI: 10.1145/3305366.3328101.

K. Zibrek and R. McDonnell. 2019. Social presence and place illusion are affected by photorealism in
embodied vr. In Motion, Interaction and Games, MIG ’19. Association for Computing Machinery,
ISBN 9781450369947. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359566.3360064. DOI:
New York, NY, USA.
10.1145/3359566.3360064.

K. Zibrek, L. Hoyet, K. Ruhland, and R. McDonnell. 2015. Exploring the effect of motion type and
emotions on the perception of gender in virtual humans. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception
(TAP), 12(3): 11.

